URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/A/A-Condo-Christmas

A Condo Christmas You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME A A Condo Christmas Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings &nbsp; California&#39;s Leader in Community Association Law &#39;TWAS THE NIGHT&nbsp; BEFORE CHRISTMAS I n an effort to minimize potential liability and calm homeowners&#39; concerns, the following report is submitted by the Association&#39;s legal counsel. Whereas,&nbsp; on or about the night prior to Christmas, there occurred at a certain condominium (hereinafter &quot;Unit&quot; with identifying numbers redacted for privacy purposes) a general lack of stirring by creatures therein, including, but not limited to, a mouse (an issue under review with the Association&#39;s pest control company). Socks had been affixed around the chimney in the hope that St. Nick, aka Santa Claus (&quot;Claus&quot;), would arrive sometime thereafter. The Board asked our firm to provide an opinion on whether the hanging of socks was a violation of the governing documents. After extensive review by one of our associate attorneys, it was determined that no violations occurred. The CC&amp;Rs and Condo Plan identify the mantle as part of the Unit. As such, owners are allowed to decorate their mantles. Occupancy Restrictions . The minor residents, i.e. children residing at the aforementioned Unit in conformance with the Association&#39;s occupancy restrictions, (which allow no more than two residents per bedroom and one for the unit i.e., the 2 + 1 rule), were in their beds and engaged in dreams of candies, nuts and/or sugar plums (also not a violation of any Association rules). According to declarations submitted by the owners of the Unit, members in good standing, they too retired to their beds. Security Incident. Suddenly, and without prior notice or warning, there occurred a disruption in the common areas. One of the aforementioned residents immediately rushed to a window to investigate the cause of the commotion. Whereupon she observed, with some degree of wonder and/or disbelief, an unregistered sleigh being pulled through the air by approximately eight (8) undocumented reindeer, having breached security by failing to stop at the guard station at the front gate. (The Board is reviewing possible changes to security procedures to avoid such incidents in the future.) The unlicensed driver of the nonconforming vehicle appeared to be the previously referenced Claus. Co-Conspirators. Said Claus was giving direction to the reindeer and specifically identified the animal co-conspirators as: Dasher, Dancer, Prancer, Vixen, Comet, Cupid, Donder, and Blitzen (hereinafter the &quot;Deer&quot;). Upon information and belief, it is further asserted that an additional co-conspirator named Rudolph may have been involved. The Association&#39;s management company is checking its records to see if it has any contact information for Claus and his accomplices. Rules Infraction. According to members who witnessed the incident, the vehicle and the Deer trespassed upon the common area roofs without Board permission and in clear violation of the Rules &amp; Regulations. Because of possible insurance implications, the Association&#39;s insurance carrier was notified. The potentially unsafe vehicle was filled with what appeared to be items of unknown origin or nature. Suddenly, without prior invitation or permission, either express or implied, the vehicle arrived at the Unit, and Claus entered via the exclusive use chimney in further violation of rules requiring all guests use front doors only. CC&amp;R Violation. The aforementioned unauthorized guest was clad in a red suit and carried a large sack containing toys, together with other unknown items. Claus was smoking tobacco in a small pipe in a flagrant violation of a recent CC&amp;R amendment against smoking in Units. (The smoking ban is currently under legal challenge by a chain-smoking couple who believe they should have been grandfathered. The unbudgeted legal fees created by the litigation may result in an emergency special assessment after the first of the year. A copy of the complaint is available for review in the management office.) Hardwood Floors . The boots worn by Claus also made excessive noise on the hardwood floors and woke the owners in the unit below--a matter scheduled for discussion at the next board meeting to determine if acoustical standards should be raised for future hard-surfaced floor installations. Members are invited to express their opinions on this important issue during the Open Forum portion of the meeting. An agenda will be posted on bulletin boards at least four days prior to the meeting. Nonprofit Status. Claus immediately filled the stockings of the aforementioned minor children with toys and other small gifts. (Out of an abundance of caution, we asked a CPA to determine if the gifts jeopardize the Association&#39;s nonprofit status.) Upon completion of the task, Claus touched the side of his nose and flew up the chimney to the roof, where the Deer waited as lookouts beside the overloaded sleigh. (The Maintenance Committee will meet with a roofing contractor to examine the roof for potential damage. If any is found, the unit owner visited by Claus may be specially assessed for the damage.) Claus quickly departed for an unknown destination. However, prior to his departure, Claus was heard to exclaim: &quot; Merry Christmas to all and to all a good night! &quot; Or words to that effect. Adrian J. Adams, Esq . ADAMS|STIRLING PLC &nbsp; &nbsp; Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login