URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/A/Asphalt-Repairs

Asphalt Repairs You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME A Asphalt Repairs Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings ASPHALT MAINTENANCE Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Maintenance Pest Control Plumbing Balcony Inspections Asbestos &amp; Mold Reserves Maintenance Duties Painting Asphalt Trees Sidewalks Parking&nbsp;Structures Maintenance &nbsp;District Roofs Common Asphalt Failures Associations are required to reserve for all major components , including asphalt. Asphalt, if designed, installed, and maintained correctly, should last indefinitely. Asphalt can fail in a number of ways. The most common failures are caused by the following: asphalt oils breaking down from sun exposure; inadequately designed asphalt thickness and base substrate to handle traffic loads (failures often occur around trash enclosures where heavy trash trucks maneuver); and uncontrolled irrigation run-off or asphalt with inadequate slope to drain water. Definitions Following are common terms related to asphalt. Remove and Replace : The process for completely removing and replacing existing pavement. This is the most expensive and intrusive form of repair. Resurface : The process of installing a new layer of asphalt over the existing pavement. The new layer is typically 1.5 inches to 2 inches thick. Seal Coat : Application of an asphalt emulsion over the asphalt to avoid oxidation or breakdown of the asphalt oil due to UV rays. Crack Sealing : The injection of hot liquid, such as rubberized sealant, into isolated cracks. This prevents water from making its way to the substrate below the asphalt. Crack sealing should be used in conjunction with seal coating. Slurry Seal : Similar to a seal coat but with more aggregate mix in the emulsified asphalt. &nbsp; CONDITION #1 New asphalt surface, which is smooth and crack-free. Streets look new and well-maintained. &nbsp; MAINTENANCE TIPS &nbsp; Plan to seal coat every 3 to 6 years. Hot inland areas will need to seal coat more often than communities along the coast. Plan to resurface the asphalt every 12 to 15 years. Do not let cracks go untreated. Cracks between the asphalt and curb and gutter, or long continuous cracks, can be sealed. Alligator cracks cannot be sealed. These areas of asphalt must be replaced. For new communities, plan on seal coating within a year of the completion of construction when the asphalt is fully cured. If you continue to have failure problems (alligatoring or spalling) with your asphalt, consider the use of a soils engineer to help design the asphalt section and substrate. Information submitted by Jeff Smith of Smith Architects , a firm that specializes in architectural services to common interest developments. &nbsp;&nbsp; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . &nbsp; &nbsp; CONDITION #2 Oxidation is starting (black to grey), small shrinkage cracks appear, and allow surface water to penetrate below the surface. &nbsp; CONDITION #3 Shrinkage cracks are getting longer and wider. Surface oxidation is pronounced. More surface water penetrates to the base. This is a good time to apply a seal coat. &nbsp; CONDITION #4 Reaching a critical point where increasing moisture penetration is damaging the base. Surface fines are being abraded and blown off. Surface color is light, and the surface is getting rough. It is not too late yet to apply a seal coat. &nbsp; CONDITION #5 Oxidation, cracking, abrading, raveling, and base damage are occurring at an increasing rate. Surface stones are socketing and being dislodged by traffic. The surface texture is open and rough. By this time, you may be able to prolong the life of the asphalt without expensive repairs by crack sealing and slurry coating. &nbsp; CONDITION #6 General disintegration rate begins to accelerate due to previous base and surface damage. Shrinkage at Curb lines is creating large gaps. Too late, save your repair money for resurfacing or, in extreme cases,&nbsp;removal and replacement of the asphalt. Start thinking of excuses as to how this was not your fault. &nbsp; CONDITION #7 Base failure hastened by water penetration. Affected area settles and cracks in &ldquo;alligator&rdquo; patterns. Failure rapidly spreads from this point. Once asphalt reaches this stage, plan on removal and replacement of the affected area or all asphalt if this condition is systemic (over 50% of the surface area). &nbsp; CONDITION #8 &ldquo;Alligatored&rdquo; areas are breaking up. Loose blocks are rocking and can be dislodged. The general surface condition is very poor. Large amounts of stone and fines are evidence. Unsupported edges are cracked and broken. &nbsp; CONDITION #9 Pot holes are developing, and large pieces of pavement are breaking off the edges. Surface heaved and generally bad.&nbsp; Traffic is forced to slow down to avoid large holes. The pot holes enlarge, and base material is free to wash away.&nbsp; Surface is heaved and generally broken. Traffic is forced to slow down because of over-all-location of holes. &nbsp; &nbsp; Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login