URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/A/Aluminum-Wiring-Zinsco-Panels

Aluminum Wiring & Zinsco Panels You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME A Aluminum Wiring & Zinsco Panels Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings ALUMINUM WIRING & ZINSCO PANELS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links HOA Insurance Contractors, Owners &amp; Renters Fire Safety Fire Safety Disclosures Fireworks Barbecues Fireplaces Roofs Aluminum Wiring Aluminum Wiring Because it was less expensive, aluminum wire was used in residential construction from the 1960s to the mid-1970s. It was later discovered that aluminum is a potential fire hazard because electrical devices such as circuit boxes, outlets, switches, lighting, and fans were not designed with it in mind. Unlike copper wiring, aluminum leads to loose connections, which can overheat and start fires. The following properties make aluminum undesirable: Higher Electrical Resistance . Aluminum has a high resistance to electrical current flow, which can lead to overheating. Less Ductile . Aluminum will fatigue and break down more readily when subjected to bending. Fatigue will cause the wire to break down internally and increasingly resist electrical current, leading to excessive heating. Galvanic Corrosion . In the presence of moisture, aluminum will undergo galvanic corrosion when it comes into contact with certain dissimilar metals. Oxidation . Exposure to oxygen in the air causes deterioration to the outer surface of the wire through oxidation.&nbsp;Over time, oxidation can deteriorate connections and present a fire hazard. Greater Malleability . Aluminum is soft and malleable, meaning it is susceptible to compression. After a screw has been over-tightened on aluminum wiring, for instance, the wire will continue to deform or &ldquo;flow&rdquo; even after the tightening has ceased. This deformation will create a loose connection and increase electrical resistance in that location. More significant Thermal Expansion and Contraction . Aluminum expands and contracts with temperature changes. This leads to loose connections and overheating. Excessive Vibration . Electrical current vibrates as it passes through wiring. This vibration is more extreme in aluminum than in copper. The vibrations will lead to loose connections and overheating. Duty to Repair/Replace . The responsibility for repairing and replacing aluminum wiring with copper or installing copper pigtails will depend on the language in each association&#39;s governing documents. In most instances, it will be the association&#39;s responsibility since the wiring is located in the walls, and most governing documents define it as common area for which the association is responsible. Insurance . For associations, some insurance carriers have stopped insuring condominium buildings with aluminum wiring because of the fire hazard. Those&nbsp;companies that continue to insure the building against fire loss will often significantly increase their premiums, making the insurance more costly. For owners, if a special assessment is imposed to replace the wiring, loss assessment insurance may not cover the assessments. The insurance is for assessments related to covered losses. Upgrading or updating electrical components would be considered a maintenance item. General maintenance, upkeep, and repair are generally not covered events. Therefore, loss assessment coverage would not apply. Owners would need to check with their insurance broker to find out for sure. Recommendation : Associations with aluminum wiring should have it inspected and maintained annually by a licensed electrician and should develop a plan for installing copper pigtails throughout. Zinsco Panels Fire Hazard . Because of their propensity to fail, Zinsco electrical panels are dangerous.&nbsp;The main concerns are (i) circuit breakers not tripping and overheating, and (ii) connections at bus bars becoming loose, which causes arcing inside the panels. Arcing could cause metal bus bar components to fuse together, making it impossible to remove circuit breakers without damaging them.&nbsp; Potential Liability . Because the panels are a known fire hazard, failure to replace them is a safety threat to everyone in the complex and a potential liability to the association. For this reason, many insurance carriers are requiring condominium associations with Zinsco panels to replace them with a safer product. Failure to do so could make a condominium complex uninsurable. Options for Replacement . Boards of directors have two options. The first is to demand that everyone hire an electrician to replace their panels. The second option is for the association to hire an electrician to do the work and impose a special assessment to pay for the materials and labor. Each option has its pros and cons. Making everyone hire an electrician may result in owners finding the cheapest possible electrician, who may or may not be licensed and insured. Also, you may have to threaten some owners with lawsuits if they refuse to do the work. It&#39;s an administrative headache. The second option ensures that a properly vetted, licensed, and insured electrician does the work. In addition, it may be cheaper due to economies of scale. It will be easier to get the work done promptly. The downside is getting some people to open their doors for the work to be done. In addition, someone will always claim that their unit was somehow damaged as a result. To minimize the risk, have someone accompany the electrician into the unit and take a picture of the panel before and after the work is done. Other Unsafe Electrical Panels Insurance carriers have identified other electrical panels they consider problematic. Condominium associations should have an electrician inspect their electrical systems. If problems are identified, boards will need to begin reserving monies to replace the panels or, depending on the condition of the panels, pass an emergency special assessment and begin replacing them.&nbsp; Federal Pacific Sylvania Magniprip Challenger Spa-blok Murray ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login