URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/A/Appointing-Committees

Appointing Committees You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME A Appointing Committees Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings APPOINTING COMMITTEES Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Boards of Directors Board Meetings Committees Management Appointing&nbsp; Committees Committee&nbsp;Meetings Executive&nbsp; Committee Budget Committee &nbsp; Committees &nbsp; Mandatory Committees Mandatory committees exist independently of the board because they are established by an association&#39;s governing documents (CC&amp;Rs or bylaws). This kind of committee cannot be abolished by the board. &nbsp;The most common example of a mandatory committee is the architectural committee . Such committees continue from board to board, and their members continue to serve until their successors are chosen. ( RONR (12th ed.) 50:29 )&nbsp;Unless the governing documents provide otherwise,&nbsp;its members can be replaced at will by the board. Standing Committees Unlike&nbsp;ad hoc committees&nbsp;that perform a single task and then cease to exist, standing committees have a continuing existence. ( RONR (12th ed.) 50:3 )&nbsp;Examples are the finance committee and the welcoming committee. Although its task may be ongoing, a standing committee can be&nbsp;dissolved&nbsp;at any time by the board of directors. Following the election of directors to a board, it chooses new officers and committees as soon as the new board members have taken up their duties, just as if the entire board membership had changed. ( RONR (12th ed.) 49:22 )&nbsp;New committee members are normally appointed at the beginning of each new board. ( RONR (12th ed.) 50:7 ) &nbsp; The members of a standing committee continue their duties until their successors are chosen. ( RONR (12th ed.) 50:29 ) &nbsp; The individual replacement of persons who may occasionally vacate board membership between elections does not automatically trigger the reappointment of standing committee members. ( RONR (12th ed.) 49:22 ) Examples of standing committees could be the following: Budget Committee . Prepares a draft budget for the next fiscal year. Maintenance Committee . Make regular inspections of the common areas with recommendations to the board. Landscape Committee . Oversee landscaping and make recommendations on plant replacements, tree pruning, etc. Welcoming Committee . Welcomes new members into the community. Ad Hoc Committees Special or&nbsp; ad hoc &nbsp;committees are temporary committees established by the board of directors to address a specific issue and go out of existence as soon as they complete a specific task. ( RONR (12th ed.) 50:3 )&nbsp;Examples of ad hoc committees include: Decorating Committee . Makes recommendations on paint colors, carpeting, etc., for a specific project. Rules Committee . Updates the association&#39;s rules for final approval by the board and/or holds violation hearings and makes recommendations to the board regarding penalties. Insurance Committee . Investigate appropriate levels of coverage and carriers that offer competitive pricing. Litigation Committee . Formed to address legal issues. Limited Duration Committees . Ad hoc committees have a limited duration.&nbsp;Unless the governing documents provide otherwise, ad hoc committees and their members serve at the pleasure of the board and can be&nbsp;dissolved at will&nbsp;by boards of directors. An ad hoc committee&nbsp;ceases to exist automatically whenever a new board is elected. ( RONR (12th ed.) 50:30 ) Once an assigned project has been completed, the committee automatically dissolves unless the board assigns additional projects to the committee. ( RONR (12th ed.) 50:3; 50:30 )&nbsp;An exception to the automatic termination of an ad hoc committee may occur when a committee is tasked with researching a matter that may extend into the term of the next board. For example, a committee preparing recommendations for redecorating the lobbies would continue its work despite the election of a new board. However, the board has the continuing right to change its members.&nbsp; Committee members and chairmen can be&nbsp;removed&nbsp;by the board without prior notice and without cause. Entire committees may be dissolved or decommissioned at any time with or without prior notice or cause. Committee Members . Boards can staff ad hoc committees exclusively with homeowners, renters, or board members, or with a mix. Unless the governing documents state otherwise, appointing committees is entirely at the&nbsp;board&#39;s discretion.&nbsp;Committees can be as small as one person or as large as the board may choose. Appointing Committees Committees, whether executive, mandatory, standing, or ad hoc, are appointed by or at the direction of the board of directors. ( RONR (12th ed.) 49:22, 50:3 ,&nbsp;50:7; Corp. Code &sect; 7210 ; Corp. Code &sect; 7212(b) )&nbsp;With each election, an incoming board can (i) keep existing committees in place, (ii) dissolve committees and create different ones (e.g., dissolve a budget committee and create a finance committee), (ii) keep existing committee members in place or appoint different ones, or (iii) choose not to create any committees. Unless a particular committee is required by the governing documents, the formation of committees is at the discretion of the board.&nbsp;Homeowners do not have the right to appoint themselves to committees. On rare occasions, governing documents provide for the election of architectural committee members by the membership. Formation of committees should be done in an open session since this does not qualify as one of the activities authorized for executive session . Size of Committees . Except for Executive Committees, a committee can be as small as one person or as large as the board wants to make it. However, the larger the committee, the more unwieldy it becomes. In HOAs, committee size typically falls in the one to five-member range, with the average being two or three members. Selecting the Chair of the Committee . Normally, committee chairs are appointed by the board. Once appointed, the committee cannot elect a different chairman. ( RONR (12th ed.) 13:17 )&nbsp;However, if a chair is not designated when the committee is appointed, the committee has the right to elect its own chairman. ( RONR (12th ed.) 13:1 8) Unless an association&#39;s governing documents state otherwise, board members may also serve as committee chairs.&nbsp; Filling Committee Vacancies . In the event of vacancies on a committee and unless the bylaws provide otherwise, the board may fill vacancies on the committee. ( RONR (12th ed.) 13:23 ) Who May Serve on Committees . Except for &quot; executive committees ,&quot; and unless the governing documents provide otherwise, there are no restrictions on who may serve on advisory committees. That means boards may appoint persons to advisory committees who are not members of the association. Unless the governing documents provide&nbsp;otherwise, boards can establish their own criteria for the committee members they appoint. For example, a board could require that candidates (i) be members in good standing, (ii) reside on the property, (iii) have attended a majority of board meetings in the past 12 months, etc. The criteria can be as lax or as stringent as boards may choose. Ex Officio Member .&nbsp;&ldquo;Ex officio&rdquo; is a Latin term meaning &ldquo;by virtue of office or position.&rdquo; An ex officio member of a committee refers to a person serving on a committee due to his or her position rather than through appointment. An association&#39;s bylaws may sometimes state that the president is an ex officio member of all committees. If that is the case, the president &quot;has the right, but not the obligation, to participate in the proceedings of the committees.&quot; ( RONR (12th ed.) 47:20 ) Duties and Term . When a committee is created, boards must assign responsibilities to the committee (unless the committee&#39;s duties have already been established in the association&#39;s governing documents). Unless the governing documents provide otherwise, committees have a limited duration. Some duties of the board cannot be delegated . Removing Committee Members Unless the committee has been established by your governing documents and its members elected by the association, committees serve at the pleasure of the board. Accordingly, the board can remove committee members at will and without explanation.&nbsp;The board can also delegate such authority to the committee chair or to the committee itself. If so, then the committee itself can vote someone off the committee.&nbsp; Quasi-personnel . Committee staffing issues are quasi-personnel. As with paid staff members, if a board is faced with unproductive or misbehaving committee members, directors would be reluctant to discuss such matters in an open session for fear of embarrassing the committee member or, worse, setting themselves up for a defamation lawsuit.&nbsp;As a result, board members would be inhibited from freely discussing such problems if their discussions were in open session. Disciplinary . Arguably, the removal of committee members also falls under executive session for disciplinary actions. A noticed hearing with the committee member is not required since there are no monetary penalties imposed or loss of rights--committee members serve in an advisory capacity at the discretion of the board. Privacy Re Admonishments . Privacy is important because public admonishments of committee members would discourage other owners from volunteering for committee work. Hence, the discussion&nbsp;and vote on disciplining or terminating committee members should be done in executive session. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login