URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/A/Annexations

Annexations You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME A Annexations Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings ANNEXATIONS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Contractor Issues Developer Issues Developer&nbsp;Transition Transfer&nbsp;of Records Annexations Condo Conversions Construction&nbsp;Defects Funding Defect Litigation SB 800&nbsp;Repairs Settlement Disclosure Phased Development &amp; Annexations To minimize risk, developers will often build a large development in phases. They build the initial development and record a Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&amp;Rs) against the properties. A homeowners&#39; association is created, and a board of directors is appointed. Once the development has sold out, they will build another tract of homes and add them to the association through annexation.&nbsp;&nbsp; To accomplish the annexation, the original CC&amp;Rs must contain a provision authorizing annexations. Each additional development becomes subject to the CC&amp;Rs of the original subdivision once it is annexed into the association, and buyers of units/lots in the annexed phase automatically become members of the association. To that end, the annexed developments record a document called a Notice of Addition, Notice of Annexation, or Supplemental Declaration referencing the original CC&amp;Rs and describing the property being added to the original development.&nbsp; The Supreme Court confirmed the mechanism for annexations in a case where CC&amp;Rs were not in a direct line of title. The defendant in the action claimed the CC&amp;Rs were not enforceable because they were not mentioned in the deed to his property. The Court disagreed:&nbsp; [I]f the restrictions are recorded before the sale, the later purchaser is deemed to agree to them. The purchase of property, knowing of the restrictions evinces the buyer&#39;s intent to accept their burdens and benefits. Thus, the mutual servitudes are created at the time of the conveyance even if there is no additional reference to them in the deed. This rule has many advantages. The first advantage is simplicity itself. One document, recorded for all purchasers to review, would establish the rules for all parcels, not many documents that may or may not be mutually consistent. There would be no bewildering mosaic of enforceability and nonenforceability... A rule allowing the uniform implementation of a general plan from the outset of the development would be good policy, which no doubt helps explain the modern trend in the cases of accepting as sufficient the slightest reference in the deeds to restrictions of record. ( Citizens for Covenant Compliance v. Anderson (1995) 12 Cal.4 th 345,&nbsp;363-364) Annexation Inconsistencies It is not uncommon for annexation documents to be inconsistent. Such inconsistencies do not necessarily detract from the general plan for the community.&nbsp;On this point, Greater Middleton Ass&rsquo;n v. Holmes Lumber Co. (1990) 222 Cal.App.3d 980 is instructive.&nbsp;There, among 77 deeds in a tract, 14 did not mention the general plan, 13 did not include a restrictive covenant requiring residential land use, and only 16 of the deeds containing the general plan reference also included a legal description of the dominant tenement covering the entire tract.&nbsp;Still, the Court of Appeal held that a covenant restricting commercial logging was enforceable under the general plan for &ldquo;all parcels within the tract.&rdquo;&nbsp;( Id. at p. 983)&nbsp;The Court of Appeal found that despite the variations among deeds, the &ldquo;uniformity and consistency in the vast majority of the deeds relative to the general plan and the restrictive covenants restricting the use of the land therein&rdquo; was sufficient.&nbsp;( Id. at p. 993.)&nbsp;Where property owners had &ldquo;purchased their property in reliance on the fact that there was a general plan to preserve the natural beauty of the area&nbsp;.&nbsp;.&nbsp;.[t]o hold otherwise would lead to an inequitable result.&rdquo;&nbsp; ( Id . at pp. 993&ndash;994) Failure to Properly Annex Plaintiff purchased vacant lots within the Hesperia Green Estates, a phased residential subdivision. He sued the Hesperia Green Estates HOA when it tried to assess his lots. The court ruled that his lots were not annexed into the Association and thus not subject to its CC&amp;Rs. The case goes into the steps for annexation that weren&rsquo;t completed properly. ( Karkaletsis v. Hesperia Green Estates Homeowners&#39; Association , Unpublished Decision , 4th Appellate District, June 18, 2025) ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login