URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/A/Attorney-Client-Privilege

Attorney-Client Privilege You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME A Attorney-Client Privilege Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings HOA ATTORNEY AND PRIVILEGED COMMUNICATIONS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Legal Issues Security Attorney-Client Privilege Liability Protections Internal Dispute Resolution Alternative Dispute Resolution Harassment Small Claims&nbsp; Court Attorneys&#39; Fees Artificial Intelligence ASSOCIATION&#39;S ATTORNEY Corporation is the Client An association&#39;s legal counsel serves as corporate counsel to&nbsp;the association. The corporation is the client, which acts through its board of directors.&nbsp;( Corp. Code &sect; 300(a) ) Corporations have a separate legal identity and enjoy the benefit of the&nbsp;attorney-client privilege. Evidence Code section 951 defines a &quot;client&quot; as the &quot;person&quot; who &quot;directly or through an authorized representative, consults a lawyer for the purpose of retaining the lawyer ....&quot; The term &quot;person&quot; includes a corporation; indeed, it may&nbsp; extend to an unincorporated organization &quot;when the organization (rather than its individual members) is the client.&quot;&nbsp; ( Smith v. Laguna Sur ) This is also the position taken by the California State Bar in Rule 3-600(A) of the Rules of Professional Conduct: &quot;In representing an organization, a member shall conform his or her representation to the concept that the client is the organization itself, acting through its highest authorized officer, employee, body, or constituent overseeing the particular engagement.&quot;&nbsp;As a result, even though members pay the attorney&#39;s legal fees through their assessments, members do not have the right to call or email the association&#39;s attorney with questions. Nor can directors presume the attorney represents them individually: &quot;In representing a corporation, an attorney&#39;s client is the corporate entity, not the individual shareholders or directors, and the individual shareholders or directors cannot presume that corporate counsel is protecting their interests.&quot; ( La Jolla Cove v. Superior Court &nbsp;(2004) 121 Cal.App.4th 773) Attorney Communications&nbsp;with the Board For most associations, making the president and the manager the contact points for the attorney is a common-sense way of keeping legal expenses under control. Otherwise, allowing five directors to call and talk to the attorney will significantly run up legal fees. Moreover, the attorney may receive conflicting instructions from five directors. Accordingly, most boards designate the president to act as liaison with the attorney to avoid conflicting instructions and unnecessary legal fees.&nbsp;The president, however, cannot block requests for legal guidance on issues. If, during a board meeting, a director asks for a legal opinion on an issue and a majority of the directors support that request, the president cannot overrule the request. The director requesting the legal opinion can also vote on his request. Director Confidences May Not Be Confidential If a director shares something with the attorney and tells him/her not to share it with the other directors, the attorney is not obligated to keep it confidential. As corporate counsel to the association, an attorney does not represent individual directors or owners. An association&#39;s legal counsel represents the association as a corporate entity. &quot;In representing an organization, a member [attorney] shall conform his or her representation to the concept that the client is the organization itself, acting through its highest authorized officer, employee, body, or constituent overseeing the particular engagement.&quot; ( State Bar Rules of Professional Conduct; Rule 3-600 (A)) When a director starts a conversation with, &quot;I have something confidential to tell you that cannot be shared with the other directors,&quot; legal counsel should stop them and explain their obligation&nbsp;to the corporation, which may require the attorney to share the information with the board. At that point, the director can decide whether to proceed. No Right to Inspect Privileged Communications Because communications, such as letters, emails, etc., between the board and legal counsel are privileged, members do not have the right to inspect them. Avoiding Conflicts of Interest To avoid conflicts of interest, the association&#39;s lawyer does not&nbsp;represent individual directors, homeowners, or the management company. If a dispute erupted between the association and the management company, the attorney would have to recuse him/herself from representing either client.&nbsp;As legal counsel to an association, a lawyer should never represent other persons or entities that could have conflicting interests with the association. When hiring legal counsel to represent the association, boards should ask if they represent management companies. If the attorney&nbsp;does, he/she will likely put the management company&#39;s interests ahead of the association&#39;s. Boards should drop that attorney from consideration. Recommending Options A good attorney will always tell directors what they need to hear, not what they want to hear. Some legal opinions are crystal clear, such as,&nbsp;&ldquo;No, you can&rsquo;t do that!&rdquo; Or, &ldquo;If you want to call a meeting, this is what the law requires.&rdquo; &nbsp; However, boards are often presented with options&ndash;Option A or Option B (and sometimes, Option C). The board must then weigh the risks and rewards of each and make a business decision. The attorney might recommend Option A. However, because they are all viable options, the board might weigh factors differently and choose Option C.&nbsp;Directors are protected from personal liability if they follow the&nbsp; Business Judgment Rule . ATTORNEY-CLIENT COMMUNICATIONS Client Communications Are Privileged As corporate counsel to an association, an attorney must communicate with directors and managing agents. An attorney-client communication is confidential between the association&#39;s legal counsel and the board or the board&#39;s representative. The communication may be oral or written. Attorney-client communications are privileged and cannot be discovered by an opposing party in litigation unless a waiver has occurred. The purpose of the privilege is to encourage full and frank communication between the board and the association&#39;s attorney. ( Upjohn Company v. United States, 449 U.S. 383, 389.) A waiver of the attorney-client privilege occurs either by voluntarily abandoning the privilege (e.g., consent or disclosure of the communication or a significant part of the communication) or by conduct impliedly abandoning the privilege (assertion of &ldquo;advice of counsel&rdquo; defense). (Evid. Code &sect; 912(a); Southern Cal. Gas Co. v. PUC (1984) 50 Cal. 3d 31, 40) No Waiver of Privilege . Section 4935(e) of the Civil Code requires that meeting minutes generally describe matters discussed in executive sessions, which is not a waiver of the attorney-client privilege, nor are communications to the membership required by statute. ( Seahaus La Jolla Owners Ass&rsquo;n v. Sup. Ct. (2014), 224 Cal.App.4th 754, 773; at a membership meeting, association attorneys answered questions regarding litigation with the developer.)&nbsp; Holder of the Privilege . The association holds the privilege through its board of directors. ( Smith v. Laguna Sur Villas ) The board holds the privilege as a whole and not by individual directors. The privilege may be lost if one or more directors: Discuss matters with non-directors outside of the executive session. Allow non-directors to attend executive sessions who have no legitimate purpose for attending. Distribute executive session minutes or privileged documents to non-directors. Attorneys Can Communicate With Managing Agents The L.A. Times ran a column with erroneous information on this subject. The authors of the &quot;Associations&quot; column ( Nov. 27, 2005, p. K11 ) stated that discussion by an association&#39;s attorney with its management company &quot;constitutes a serious breach of confidentiality.&quot; The authors then advised readers, &quot;If your board signed a management company contract relinquishing that privilege by allowing management employees to make direct contact with the attorney, the board should be sued for breach of its fiduciary duty.&quot; The writers of the column were badly mistaken and gave incompetent advice.&nbsp;A corporation can only communicate through its agents, and one of those agents is&nbsp; the manager . Accordingly, there is no breach of fiduciary duty and no breach of the attorney-client privilege when the manager talks to the association&#39;s attorney on behalf of the board. Such communications are provided for by law: &quot;Client&quot; means a person who, directly or through an authorized representative , consults a lawyer for the purpose of retaining the lawyer or securing legal service or advice from him in his professional capacity...&quot; [ Calif. Evid. Code 951 , emphasis added] Communications between an association&#39;s attorney and its managing agent do not lose their confidential character since managing agents are generally necessary to further the association&#39;s interests and are reasonably necessary for the purpose of transmitting information between the attorney and the board. [emphasis added, See Evid. Code &sect; 952 &amp; &sect; 912(d) , comment; Benge v. Sup.Ct. (1982) 131 CA3d 336, 346; San Francisco v. Sup.Ct. (1951) 37 C2d 227, 234-235] Moreover, a liaison between company officials and outside counsel is an &quot;authorized representative&quot; of the company. [ State Farm v. Sup.Ct. (1997) 54 CA4th 625, 639] Thus, confidential communications between legal counsel and the association&#39;s managing agent are legal and privileged. Members Have No Right to Privileged Communications In an action by owners to compel the discovery of privileged communications, the court held that associations are not required to disclose privileged information to owners. As the court noted: It is no secret that crowds cannot keep them. Unlike directors, the residents owed no fiduciary duties to one another and may have been willing to waive or breach the attorney-client privilege for reasons unrelated to the best interests of the association. . . . &quot;[o]ne can only imagine the sleepless nights an attorney and the Board of Directors may incur if privileged information is placed in the hands of hundreds of homeowners who may not all have the same goals in mind.&quot; ( Smith v. Laguna Sur Villas ) Karpoff Article . For a more detailed analysis, see &quot; The Ethics of Honoring the Attorney-Client Privilege &quot; by Michael S. Karpoff, presented at the 2009 Community Associations Institute Law Seminar, January 31, 2009. The article has been reprinted with permission from the Community Associations Institute. Also see issues involving adversarial directors and confidential information . Litigation Privilege A related form of privilege is the &quot;litigation privilege.&quot; It protects statements made in the course of judicial proceedings. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 47(b)(2) ) The privilege provides&nbsp;absolute immunity&nbsp;from all tort actions, save malicious prosecution. ( Silberg v. Anderson (1990) 50 Cal.3d 205, 215-16) The purpose of this privilege is to free litigants and witnesses from fear of harassment for what they say in litigation and to &ldquo;avoid an unending roundelay of litigation.&rdquo; ( Silberg , supra,&nbsp;50 Cal.3d at 213) The litigation privilege has been described as &ldquo;absolute, regardless of malice and extending even to perjury.&rdquo; ( Jacob B. v. County of Shasta , (2017) 40 Cal.4th 948, 958) The privilege is not restricted to parties to a lawsuit; it may also be claimed by nonparties connected or related to the proceedings. ( Foothill Fed. Credit Union v. Sup. Ct. (2007) 155 Cal.App.4th 632, 636) The litigation privilege extends to publications required or permitted by law&nbsp;&ldquo;to achieve the objects of the litigation, even though the publication is made outside the courtroom and no function of court or its officers is invoked.&rdquo; ( Albertson v. Raboff (1956) 46 Cal.2d 375, 380-381) ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login