URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/A/Adopting-Amending-HOA-Rules

Adopting & Amending HOA Rules You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME A Adopting & Amending HOA Rules Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings ADOPTING & AMENDING HOA RULES Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Rules &amp; Regulations Renters Pets Daycare, Drones, Flags Vehicles Clubhouse, Gym, Pool Nuisance Issues Clotheslines, Gardens, Turf &nbsp; Rules &amp; Regulations Rules&nbsp;Enforcement Violation&nbsp;Hearings Fine&nbsp;Schedule Operating Rules Defined &nbsp;&nbsp; Operating Rules &quot;Operating Rules&quot; are defined as any rule or regulation that applies to the management and operation of a common interest development or the conduct of its business and affairs. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4340 ) As provided for in Civil Code &sect; 4355(a) , &quot;Operating Rules&quot; are specifically defined as a rule or regulation that applies to: Use of the common area or an exclusive use common area . Use of a separate interest, including any aesthetic or architectural standards that govern the alteration of a separate interest. Member discipline, including any schedule of monetary penalties for violating the governing documents and any procedure for imposing penalties. Delinquent assessment payment plans . Resolution of assessment disputes . Reviewing and approving or disapproving a proposed physical change to a member&#39;s separate interest or to the common area. Election rules .&nbsp; Operating Rule Exceptions Per Civil Code &sect; 4355(b) , the following do not fall under the definition of an &quot;Operating Rule&quot; and are free of the requirements of Civil Code sections 4360 and 4365 : A decision regarding the maintenance of the common area. A decision on a specific matter that is not intended to apply generally. A decision setting the amount of a regular or special assessment. A rule change required by law, if the board has no discretion as to the substantive effect of the rule change. Issuance of a document that merely repeats existing law or the governing documents. Rulemaking Authority Before enacting rules and regulations, associations must have rulemaking authority either statutorily or through their governing documents.&nbsp;( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 4350(b) .) Some older documents are silent on rulemaking authority. Fortunately, governing documents in newer developments all have rulemaking authority since the Department of Real Estate requires it. (Cal. Code Regs, tit. 10, &sect; 2792.21(a)(7).) Boards can adopt rules after rulemaking authority has been established.&nbsp;Absent rulemaking authority in the governing documents, associations still have statutory authority to adopt rules for specific matters, such as Election Rules ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105 ), Architectural Guidelines &nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 4765 ), IDR Policy &nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 5905 ) and Collection Policies ( Civ. Code &sect; 5730 ). Emergency Rule Change If the board determines that an immediate rule change is required to address an imminent threat to public health or safety or an imminent risk of substantial economic loss to the association, it can make an emergency rule change without a 28-day waiting period. Once adopted, emergency rules take effect upon notice to the membership. An emergency rule change is effective for up to 120 days . ( Civ. Code &sect; 4360(d) ) &nbsp;&nbsp; Emergency Rules 28-Day Notice of Proposed Change Nonsubstantive Changes .&nbsp;I f the board is doing nothing more than correcting grammar or renumbering provisions, the 28-day notice period is not triggered since the rules are not being changed. Even so, the board must distribute a copy of the clean set along with an explanation of what was done and that no changes were made to the rules. Substantive Changes . Before adopting or amending an operating rule or changing the fine schedule , the board must provide general notice of a proposed rule change at least 28&nbsp;days before making the rule change. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4360(a) )&nbsp;The notice must include the text of the proposed rule change and a description of its purpose and effect.&nbsp;Notice is not required if the board determines that an immediate rule change is necessary to address an imminent threat to public health or safety or an imminent risk of substantial economic loss to the association. Comments by Members .&nbsp;A decision on a proposed rule change must be made at a board meeting after consideration of any comments made by association members. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4360(b) ) The board must consider comments by members, but is not required to adopt them. Notice of Rule Adoption Only CC&amp;Rs are recorded, not rules, bylaws, or articles of incorporation. The board must deliver notice to the membership within 15 days of adopting or changing a rule. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4360(c) ) &nbsp;Rules become effective upon written notice to the membership. Membership Veto .&nbsp;The membership has a limited right to veto rule changes.&nbsp;Members owning 5% or more of the separate interests may call a special meeting of the members to reverse a rule change. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4365 )&nbsp;The written request may not be delivered more than 30 days after the association members are notified of the rule change. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4365(b) ) The rule change may be reversed by the affirmative vote of a majority of the votes represented and voting at a duly held meeting at which a quorum is present. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4365(d) ) The&nbsp;board must give notice of a special meeting and send out ballots.&nbsp;The results of the membership vote must be provided to the membership within 15 days of the vote . ( Civ. Code &sect; 4365(g) ) If an operating rule is reversed, it cannot be re-adopted by the board for at least one year. However, the board may vote on other operating rules covering the same subject. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4365(f) ) Disciplinary Policies .&nbsp;Once rules have been adopted and distributed to the membership, they do not need to be distributed annually. New members of the association must receive a copy of the rules and fine policy, and normally do so through escrow.&nbsp;Rule changes&nbsp;need only be distributed once--when they are adopted. Disciplinary policies , however, must be distributed annually . Rules Are Not Presumed Reasonable Rules and regulations are not given the same presumption of reasonableness as are CC&amp;Rs. ( Dolan-King v. Rancho Santa F e ) Whether a rule is reasonable is to be determined not by reference to facts specific to the objecting homeowner but by reference to the common interest development as a whole. The same test of reasonableness used for CC&amp;Rs is used for rules, i.e., rules should be enforced unless they are wholly arbitrary , violate a fundamental public policy, or impose a burden on the use of affected land that far outweighs any benefit. ( Sui v. Price ) To be enforceable,&nbsp;operating rules&nbsp;must meet the following criteria ( Civ. Code &sect; 4350 ): The rule is in writing. The rule is within the board&#39;s authority conferred by law, or&nbsp;the declaration , articles of incorporation or association, or bylaws of the association. The rule does not conflict with governing law, the&nbsp;declaration,&nbsp;articles of incorporation, or&nbsp;bylaws. ( Ekstrom v. Marquesa ) The rule is adopted, amended, or repealed in&nbsp; good faith &nbsp;and in substantial compliance with the requirements of this article. The rule is&nbsp; reasonable . Miscellaneous &nbsp; Amending Bylaws Amending CC&amp;Rs Amending Condo Plans &amp; Parcel Maps ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login