URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/A/Annual-Budget-Policy-Disclosures

Annual Budget & Policy Disclosures You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME A Annual Budget & Policy Disclosures Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings BUDGET AND POLICY DISCLOSURES Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Annual Budgets Collections Audits &amp; Reviews Bank Accounts &amp; Loans Reserves Taxes Annual&nbsp;Budget Dues Special &amp; Emergency Assessments Cost Centers Fee Limitations Disclosures Each year, associations must distribute an &quot; ANNUAL BUDGET REPORT &quot; and an &quot; ANNUAL POLICY STATEMENT &quot; as described below. Other disclosures are required, which are also described below. Upon written consent of members, associations may distribute documents and disclosures electronically; otherwise, all documents must be distributed by &quot;First-class mail, postage prepaid, registered or certified mail, express mail, or overnight delivery by an express service carrier.&quot; ( Civ. Code &sect; 4040 ) See &quot; Notice Requirements .&quot; At least 30 days before distributing the Annual Budget Report 1. Contact Information . Notify members of their obligation to provide the association with their contact information . ( Civ. Code &sect; 4041 ) &nbsp; ANNUAL BUDGET REPORT 30 to 90 Days Before the Start of the Fiscal Year (Civil Code &sect; 5300) 1.&nbsp; Pro Forma Budget . A full budget or a summary ( Civ. Code &sect; 5320 ) showing the estimated revenue and expenses on an accrual basis. [NOTE: Boards must notify members, not less than 30 nor more than 60 days before any increase in regular assessments or any special assessment . ( Civ. Code &sect; 5615 )] 2. Reserve Summary . A summary of the reserves . 3. Reserve Funding Plan . A summary of the reserve funding plan . 4. Major Component Repairs . A statement as to whether the board will defer or not undertake repairs or replacement of major components, including a justification for the deferral or decision not to undertake the repairs or replacement. 5. Anticipated Special Assessments . A statement as to whether one or more special assessments will be required to repair, replace, or restore any major component or to provide adequate reserves. If so, the statement shall set out the estimated amount, commencement date, and duration of the assessment. 6. Reserve Funding Mechanism . A statement as to the mechanism or mechanisms (including assessments, borrowing, other assets, deferral of selected replacements or repairs, or alternative mechanisms) by which reserves will be funded to repair or replace major components. 7. Procedures for Calculating Reserves . The procedures used for the calculation and establishment of those reserves to defray the future repair, replacement, or additions to major components that the association is obligated to maintain. The statement shall include, but need not be limited to, reserve calculations made using the formula described in paragraph (4) of subdivision (b) of Section 5570 , and may not assume a rate of return on cash reserves in excess of 2% above the discount rate published by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco at the time the calculation was made. 8. Outstanding Loans . A statement as to whether the association has any outstanding loans with an original term of more than one year, including the payee, interest rate, amount outstanding, annual payment, and when the loan is scheduled to be retired. 9. Insurance Summary . Distribute a summary of the association&#39;s insurance . 10. Assessment &amp; Reserve Form . The Assessment and Reserve Funding Disclosure Summary form, prepared pursuant to Section 5570 , shall accompany each annual budget report or summary of the annual budget report. 11. [FOR CONDOS ONLY] FHA/VA Certification . As part of the annual budget report, condominium associations must disclose in 10-point font on separate pages whether they are or are not certified by the FHA and VA. For the language to use in the disclosure, see FHA/VA disclosure . 12. Charges for Documents Provided . &nbsp; The completed &ldquo;Charges For Documents Provided&rdquo; disclosure. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4528 ) NOTE #1 : Full Report . If a member requests full reports, the association must deliver a full report to that member, rather than a summary of the report. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5320 ) NOTE #2 : Secondary Address . Upon request pursuant to Section 5260 , an additional copy of those notices must be delivered to a member&#39;s secondary address. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4040 ) &nbsp; ANNUAL POLICY STATEMENT 30 to 90 Days Before the Start of the Fiscal Year (Civil Code &sect; 5310) 1. Designated Recipient . The name and address of the person designated to receive official communications from the association. ( Section 4035 ) 2. Right to Notice to Two Addresses . A statement explaining that a member may submit a request to have notices sent to up to two different specified addresses. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4040(b) ) 3. General Notice Location . The location, if any, designated for the posting of a general notice. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4045(a)(3) ) 4. Right to Individual Delivery . Notice of a member&rsquo;s option to receive general notices by individual delivery.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 4045(b) ) 5. Right to Minutes . Notice of a member&rsquo;s right to receive copies of meeting minutes. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4950(b) ) 6. Collection Policy . A statement of assessment collection policies. ( Civ. Code &sect;5730 ) 7. Lien Policy . A statement describing the association&rsquo;s policies and practices in enforcing lien rights or other legal remedies for default in the payment of assessments. 8. Rules Enforcement Policy . A statement describing the association&rsquo;s discipline policy, if any, including any schedule of penalties for violations of the governing documents. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5850 ) 9. Dispute Resolution Procedures . A summary of dispute resolution procedures. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 5920 and &sect; 5965 ) 10. Architectural . A summary of any requirements for association approval of a physical change to property. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 4765(c) ) 11. Overnight Payments . The mailing address for overnight payment of assessments. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect;&nbsp;5655 ) 12. Electronic Voting . Provide the procedure to either opt out of or opt into electronic voting. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 5105(i)(1)(D ))&nbsp; 13. Miscellaneous . Any other information that is required by law or the governing documents or that the board determines to be appropriate for inclusion. NOTE #1 : Full Report . If a member requests full reports, the association must deliver a full report to that member, rather than a summary of the report. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5320 ) NOTE #2 : Secondary Address . Upon request pursuant to Section 5260 , an additional copy of those notices must be delivered to a member&#39;s secondary address. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4040 ) &nbsp; 120 days After the Close of the Fiscal Year Financial Statement . Unless the governing documents impose more stringent standards, a review of the financial statement of the association must be prepared per GAAP by a CPA for any fiscal year in which the gross income of the association exceeds $75,000 and distributed to members. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5305 ) &nbsp; &nbsp;Secretary of State Secretary of State Filing . Every association, whether incorporated or unincorporated, must annually and biannually file statements of information with the Secretary of State. &nbsp; As-Needed Assessment Increases . Notify members, not less than 30 nor more than 60 days before any increase in regular assessments or any special assessment . ( Civ. Code &sect; 5615 ) Board Meetings . See notice requirements for board meetings , executive session meetings, and emergency meetings . Board Minutes . The minutes, draft minutes, or a summary of the minutes of any board meeting (other than an executive session) must be available to members within 30 days of the meeting. Borrowing from Reserves . Disclose both intent to borrow as well as actual borrowing from reserves . Any delays in repayment of monies borrowed from reserves also require disclosure to the membership. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5515 and &sect; 5520 ) Committee Minutes . Minutes of meetings of committees with decision-making authority for meetings commencing on or after January 1, 2007, within 15 calendar days following approval. Construction Defects . Disclose litigation against the declarant (i) any agreements with the developer; (ii) any defects needing correction or replacement, (iii) an estimate of when defects will be corrected or replaced, and (iv) which defects will not be corrected or replaced. &quot;Defects&quot; includes damage resulting from the defects and (v) settlement agreements. ( Civ. Code &sect; 6100 and &sect; 6150 ) Copy Costs . Allow inspection of books and records . Disclose in advance any copying costs that will be billed to the requesting party.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 5205 ) Disciplinary Hearings . Give notice of disciplinary hearings and the results of those hearings. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5855 ) Election Results . Publish the results of membership elections (special assessments, amendments, board elections, etc.).&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 5120 ) Escrow Disclosures . Within 10 days of a written request by a unit owner, provide information and documents to the seller or seller&#39;s agent for escrow disclosures. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4525 , &sect; 4528 , &sect; 4530 ) Fine Policy Changes . Give notice of any changes in the association&#39;s fine policy . Hazardous Materials . Notify members of known hazardous materials such as asbestos. ( H&amp;S Code &sect; 25915.2 ) Insurance Changes . Notify members if&nbsp; insurance policies are canceled and not immediately replaced or if there are any significant changes. Lawsuits . Give notice of lawsuits when appropriate. Lender Foreclosures . Boards should record a blanket &quot; Request for Notification &quot; of lender foreclosures so the association will know who to bill for assessments. Litigation Expenses . Prepare an accounting of litigation expenses on at least a quarterly basis and make it available for inspection by members.&nbsp; ( Civ. Code &sect; 5520 ) Management Change . Within 60 days of a change in management, file a notice with the Secretary of State. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5405(c) ) Manager Certification . Managers must disclose to the board their certification status . Membership Meetings . Publish notice of membership meetings . Rule Changes . Give notice of proposed rule changes .&nbsp; ( Civ. Code &sect; 4360 ) Security Disclosure . Although not required, associations should annually notify members that they are responsible for their own&nbsp; safety and security . Transaction with Officer or Director . Provide notice of any transaction between the association and a director involving more than $50,000.&nbsp;( Corp. Code &sect; 8322 ) Unlawful Restrictions . Provide a cover page for CC&amp;Rs containing language prohibiting discriminatory restrictions. See statute for specific language and size of type-font. ( Gov. Code &sect; 12956.1 ) Workplace Hazards . Notify employees of workplace hazards. ( Labor Code &sect; 6401.7 ) ASSISTANCE : For assistance preparing disclosures, contact us . To stay current on disclosure requirements, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login