URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/A/Annual-Budgets

Annual Budgets You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME A Annual Budgets Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings ANNUAL BUDGETS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Annual Budgets Collections Audits &amp; Reviews Bank Accounts &amp; Loans Reserves Taxes Annual&nbsp;Budget Dues Special &amp; Emergency Assessments Cost Centers Fee Limitations Disclosures &nbsp; Budget Requirements (2-Minute Video) Preparing an Annual Budget Duty to Levy Assessments . Boards must impose regular and special assessments sufficient to carry out their duties under the governing documents. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5600(a) ;&nbsp; Park Place v. Naber ) Their primary duties are to (i) maintain the common areas, (ii) fund the reserves for maintaining the common areas, (iii) insure the common areas (per statute and the CC&amp;Rs), and (iv)&nbsp; enforce the governing documents . Pro Forma Budget .&nbsp;A pro forma&nbsp;operating budget is typically prepared by management, a budget committee, or the board (or a combination of the three). An operating budget encompasses all expenses for the fiscal year, including contributions to reserves. The budget must estimate revenue and expenses on an accrual basis . ( Civ. Code &sect; 5300(b)(1) )&nbsp;As nonprofit organizations, associations must budget so that revenues do not exceed expenses, i.e., total income minus expenses should equal zero. There are two techniques for preparing budgets: Zero-Base Budgeting . This approach starts each year&#39;s budget from a zero base, i.e., at the beginning of the budgeting process, all budget line items have a value of $0 and must be justified. The advantage is that starting each line item at zero, the budget committee must justify each item in the budget. This should bring to light any wastage and obsolete operations. The disadvantage to this approach is that it can be very time-consuming. Incremental Budgeting . In incremental budgeting, the current year&#39;s budget serves as a basis for next year&#39;s budget and is simply adjusted. The most common methods of adjustment are: CPI Adjustment. The easiest and least effective method is to simply take the Consumer Price Index (the measure of inflation published by the government) and apply it to all line items. The disadvantage is that not all items in a budget are affected by the CPI. This results in some line items being over-budgeted and others being under-budgeted.&nbsp; &nbsp; Variance Projections. This is the method used by most associations. Since most line items in an association&#39;s budget are necessary rather than discretionary (utilities, insurance, maintenance, etc.), the budget committee starts with the current year&#39;s budget and reviews variances projected through the end of the fiscal year. This gives the committee an estimate of actual expenses for the year for each line item so it can adjust expenses up or down, as needed. 20% Limitations on Dues Increase Balanced Budgets . Budgets must be balanced since boards cannot impose an assessment that exceeds the amount necessary to defray the costs for which it is levied. ( Civ. Code 5600(b) ) Any increase in annual assessments (dues) requires the preparation, approval, and distribution of a budget within certain statutory guidelines and deadlines as described below. 20% Limitation on Increases . Notwithstanding more restrictive limitations in&nbsp;the&nbsp; governing documents , the board of directors may increase regular assessments (dues) by up to 20% of the association&#39;s&nbsp; preceding fiscal year &nbsp; without membership approval . Membership approval is defined as a&nbsp; majority of a quorum &nbsp;of members constituting a quorum, casting a majority of the votes--&quot; quorum &quot; means more than 50% &nbsp;of the owners of an association. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5605 ) &nbsp; The 20% increase is based on the association&#39;s regular assessments for the prior year. This includes operations and reserves contributions as defined in the budget. With membership approval , the budget can be increased by more than 20% .&nbsp; Overall vs. Individual . The statute is unclear on whether the 20% increase must be calculated to see if it increases any&nbsp;member&#39;s dues by more than 20%. The consensus in the legal community is that the limitation applies to the increase in the totality of the assessment.&nbsp;The statute specifies 20% of the association&rsquo;s regular assessments, not 20% of any individual owner&rsquo;s&nbsp;assessments. With variable and hybrid assessments, it is possible that a 20% increase in the prior year&#39;s budget could result in an individual&#39;s increase to be 21%&nbsp;or 22%, while other members might experience an 18% or 19% increase.&nbsp; Affordable Housing Units Limitation . An association that records its original declaration on or after January 1, 2025, may not impose an increase of its regular assessments on the owner of a deed-restricted affordable housing unit that is more than 5% plus the percentage change in the cost of living, not to exceed 10% greater than the preceding regular assessment for the association&rsquo;s preceding fiscal year.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 5605(c) ) Comparing Assessments to Other Associations It is difficult, if not impossible, to arrive at any meaningful &quot;average&quot; monthly assessment comparison between associations because of significant differences from one development to the next. The factors that impact assessments include: Age of the Development : &nbsp;the older it is, the more expensive it is to maintain it; Utilities : &nbsp;some properties are master metered for water, gas, and/or electricity; others are not; Insurance : &nbsp;deductibles and levels of insurance may vary significantly; in addition, some carry earthquake insurance, and others do not; Common Areas : &nbsp;pools, clubhouses, tennis courts, streets, parking lots, lighting, type of roofing, type of structure, quality of plumbing, etc. vary from property to property; Deferred Maintenance : &nbsp;the longer maintenance has been deferred, the more costly the repairs; Management Philosophy : &nbsp;expectations by the membership for extra or upgraded services for security, cable TV, concierge services, holiday parties, etc. (owners in Beverly Hills condominiums probably have higher service expectations than owners in Fresno); Number of Units :&nbsp; the more units, the lower the average cost per unit to maintain the common areas&nbsp;and Geographical Location : &nbsp;properties on or near the beach have higher maintenance costs than those not on the beach; the same is true for properties above the snow line. Distributing the Budget Report Once the board has approved the budget, an &quot;Annual Budget Report&quot; must be prepared. The Report must contain the following ( Civ. Code &sect; 5300(b) ): A pro forma operating budget, A summary of the association&rsquo;s reserves, A statement regarding any deferral of reserve item repairs, A statement of whether special assessments related to reserves or reserve components are anticipated, A statement of how reserves will be funded, A statement of how the reserves were calculated, and A statement regarding any outstanding association loans. Deadline . The Annual Budget Report must be distributed to the membership not less than 30 nor more than 90 days before the end of the association&#39;s fiscal year. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 5300(a) ) Summary . Instead of a full report, the board may distribute a summary and reserve summary with a written notice (in at least 10-point bold type on the front page of the summary of the budget) that the complete budget is available at the business office of the association or other location and copies can be made, if requested, at the association&#39;s expense. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5320 ) Request for Full Report . If a member requests a copy of the entire budget report rather than a summary, the association must provide it ( Civ. Code &sect; 5320 ) by individual delivery ( Civ. Code &sect; 4040 ) Email Distribution . Unless members authorize delivery by email , budgets must be distributed in non-electronic form, i.e., paper. Disclosure Checklist . See disclosure checklist . Re-mailing Budget Report . Sometimes, absentee members forget to update their contact information, and the budget package is returned to the association. See re-mailing the budget report. Required Notice of Assessment Increase Associations must provide individual notice under&nbsp; Section 4040 &nbsp;to the members of any increase in the regular or special assessments of the association, not less than 30 nor more than 60 days before the increased assessment becomes due. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5615 ) See Calculating Notice Requirements . Failure to distribute the annual budget report at not less than 30 nor more than 90 days before the end of the fiscal year voids any increase in regular assessments approved by the board of directors. A majority of a quorum of members must then approve any such increase. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5605(a) ) Midyear Budget Increase for Unexpected Expenses Sometimes, a board discovers partway into a fiscal year that unexpected significant increases in utility rates or insurance premiums push operating expenses into negative territory and create a significant operating deficit. When this happens, boards have the following options for funding unexpected midyear expenses: 5% Assessment . Boards can approve a special assessment of 5% or less . If the amount is insufficient, the board must explore other options described below. Emergency Assessment . Boards can approve a special assessment greater than 5% if it qualifies as an&nbsp; emergency . Membership-Approved Increase .&nbsp;Boards can present a special assessment or amended budget to the&nbsp;membership for approval. The board must consider alternatives to address the expense if the membership disapproves. Reserve Borrowing . Boards can&nbsp; borrow from reserves &nbsp;to cover unexpected expenses and repay the borrowed amount the following year. Budget Reductions . Boards can look for items in the budget to reduce or eliminate to offset unexpected expenses. Midyear Budget Increase . The benefit of amending the budget is the board can increase assessments by&nbsp;up to 20%. There is no prohibition in&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 5300 &nbsp;precluding a board from revising the budgetary information required by subsection (b). Assuming the original budget was timely distributed, the board will have met its one-time statutory obligations under&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 5605(a) . It should be entitled to both revise the budget and increase regular assessments up to 20% as needed after the&nbsp; fiscal year &nbsp;has begun.&nbsp;In addition,&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 5615 &nbsp;refers to &ldquo;any increase in the regular assessments.&rdquo; If boards do not have the power to increase regular assessments midyear, then Section 5615 has no meaning. The 30 to 60-day timing differs from the 30 to 90-day timing in&nbsp; Section 5300 &nbsp;applicable to beginning-of-year increases. If&nbsp; Section 5615 &nbsp;is intended to apply to beginning-of-year increases only, then any association that distributes the budgets 61 to 90 days before the beginning of the fiscal year (to comply with&nbsp; Section 5300 ) can&rsquo;t raise assessments because they just violated Section 5615. Therefore, section 5615 can only apply in the context of midyear increases in regular assessments. In many associations, the most significant unexpected and unbudgeted expense is a substantial increase in insurance premiums.&nbsp;In an unpublished case, the court of appeals concluded that a one-time charge ($1,000 per unit) to cover operational costs (insurance premiums and other costs) is not a special assessment if it stays within the 20%&nbsp;limitation. Miscellaneous See &quot; Budget-Finance Committee &quot;&nbsp; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login