URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/A/Amending-Condo-Plans-Parcel-Maps

Amending Condo Plans & Parcel Maps You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME A Amending Condo Plans & Parcel Maps Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings CONDOMINIUM PLANS & PARCEL MAPS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Governing Documents Bylaws &amp; Articles CC&amp;Rs CC&amp;Rs Amendments&nbsp; &amp; Restatements Condo Plan Rent Restrictions Short-Term Rentals Room&nbsp;&amp; Occupancy Restrictions Condominium Plans Defined .&nbsp;A condominium plan and CC&amp;Rs are filed by the&nbsp;declarant&nbsp;prior to the construction of a condominium project. It is a multi-sheet 8&frac12; x 11&nbsp;drawing prepared by a land surveyor, which is attached and recorded as an exhibit to the&nbsp;CC&amp;Rs. If not attached as an exhibit, and a title company cannot locate it, it might be on file with the Department of Real Estate or with the city or county building department. A condominium plan contains a general description of a condominium project with three-dimensional descriptions and boundaries of units and common areas, and exclusive use common areas, such as balconies, parking spaces, and storage spaces.&nbsp; Notes . The &quot;Notes&quot; section will typically describe a unit&#39;s boundaries as unfinished interior surfaces of the perimeter walls, ceilings, and floors. The notes also describe what is not part of a unit, such as bearing walls, columns, foundation slabs, party walls, etc., contained in a unit or surrounding a unit. The plan should also describe exclusive-use common areas that may or may not be connected to a unit, such as parking spaces, balconies, patios, roof decks, and storage areas. See&nbsp; sample condo plan . Errors . Condominium plans are usually prepared before the building is constructed. Often, the engineer does not go back in after the building is completed to compare measurements with the condominium plan, which means there may be variations in the condo plan and what is actually constructed.&nbsp; Illegible Condo Plans . Old condo plans are sometimes illegible.&nbsp;To address the problem, a surveyor can create a &lsquo;retraced&rsquo; condominium plan, which shows the boundaries of the units. It can then be attacked to the illegible plan. Deeds would still reference the illegible condo plan&#39;s recording information, but the new plan allows everyone to see the boundaries of their units. Amending Condo Plans . A condominium plan may be amended or revoked by a recorded instrument that is acknowledged and signed by all the persons who, at the time of amendment or revocation, are persons whose signatures are required under&nbsp;Section 4290. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4295 )&nbsp; As required by Civil Code &sect; 4290 , the certificate consenting to the recordation of a condominium plan that is required by subdivision (c) of&nbsp; Section 4285 &nbsp;shall be signed and acknowledged by all of the following persons: The record owner of the fee title to that property is included in the condominium project. In the case of a condominium project that will terminate upon the termination of an estate for years, by all lessors and lessees of the estate for years. In the case of a condominium project subject to a life estate, by all life tenants and remainder interests. The trustee or the beneficiary of each recorded deed of trust, and the mortgagee of each recorded mortgage encumbering the property. Parcel Maps Parcel Map . A &quot;parcel map&quot; is a land division map used for developments of four (4) or fewer residential lots. In the case of commercial, industrial, and agricultural zoned property, more than four lots can be created by a parcel map. Tract Map . Subdivision maps or tract maps are used in planned developments with five or more lots to show the boundaries and location of each lot and the common areas. Amending Parcel Maps . Sometimes, planned development parcel maps need to be amended to address&nbsp; HOA property tax issues . T he &quot;Subdivision Map Act&quot; ( Gov. Code &sect; 66410 &nbsp; et seq . ) regulates and controls the design and improvement of subdivisions. Any property divided into two or more parcels is subject to the Map Act. Miscellaneous &nbsp; Amending Bylaws Amending CC&amp;Rs Amending Rules &amp; Regulations ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login