URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/B/Bidding-Policy

Bidding Policy You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME B Bidding Policy Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings BIDDING POLICY Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Contractor Issues Developer Issues Contractors Bidding&nbsp;&nbsp;Policy Contract&nbsp;Formation Construction Managers Warranties Surety Bonds Mechanic&#39;s Liens Building Permits Requesting Proposals Request for Proposal . Too often large maintenance projects such as roof replacements, copper repiping projects, painting &amp; waterproofing projects, etc., start with a &quot;Request for Proposal&quot; (RFP) from the board to various contractors. Boards ask contractors to propose how they would repair the association&#39;s roofs or paint their buildings. Each contractor then submits a proposal based on his own approach to the project. As a result, bids can vary significantly in the quality and quantity of materials used and how they are applied. That leads to large disparities in project pricing. Boards then pick a bid not realizing they may be selecting an expensive application of a shoddy product by an inexperienced contractor with little or no insurance and meaningless warranties. This could have serious legal consequences for the association (and the board). Request for Bid . The best method for obtaining true bids is by using a &quot;Request for Bid&quot; (RFB). With an RFB, all vendors are provided identical specifications describing the scope of work, the quality of materials to use, how the work is to be done, levels of insurance required and a timeline for completion. This allows for true competitive bidding. To prepare a proper RFB and oversee the bidding, the board must employ the services of an independent consultant or&nbsp; construction manager . Three Bids . There is no statute requiring three bids whenever a board authorizes projects. However, good business practice requires bidding for large projects. The threshold amount for seeking bids will depend on the association&#39;s budget. Associations with a $5 million annual budget will have a higher threshold before going out to bid than will associations with a $50,000 budget. Frequency of Bids . If an association already has a good company providing good services, the board is not obligated to force it to annually re-bid their services. This includes companies such as landscapers, elevator companies, management companies, security services, etc. Forcing them into an&nbsp;annual&nbsp;bidding cycle&nbsp;can&nbsp;lead them to view their relationship with the association as a short-term commitment rather than one into which they should invest time and energy. Annual re-bidding will also cause competitors to stop preparing and submitting proposals. They will view the annual dance as an exercise in futility. If a company has been providing valuable services and has not exceeded CPI increases, the company could be in place for many years without going through a formal re-bidding process. Instead, management can spot-check industry pricing by making phone calls. Even if the board were to request new landscape bids on a 5-year cycle, it does not mean the board should switch companies if one came in with a lower bid. Switching to a cheaper company could result in lower-quality service.&nbsp;If the&nbsp;existing vendor is not the lowest bid but is competitive, the association benefits from continuity of relationship with a known entity providing reliable services--one that is already familiar with the association&#39;s policies and procedures. Evaluating Bids Small Projects . Boards will have difficulty obtaining bids for small repairs. Many contractors will not waste time preparing written proposals for a $500 repair. For routine plumbing repairs, most boards call a plumber familiar with the development and pay him as needed to repair leaks. This is an acceptable business practice. Large Variances . Ideally, bids should be within 10% of each other. If there are significant variances, one of the bidders has made a mistake and improperly bid the project or is intentionally misbidding it. An unusually low bid may be undercutting legitimate bids and plans to substitute inferior materials or make up the difference with change orders. Boards need to investigate any large variances that may exist before making a decision. Low Bid . Boards are not required to accept the lowest bid. The lowest&nbsp;bid is not always the best bid. The company may be small and inexperienced and may be operating on a shoestring budget with low levels of insurance, limited equipment, and minimal staffing. If someone quits or equipment fails, your project may suffer. With a more established company, the chances are better that the work will be done on time and within budget. Bid Shopping There are two types of bid shopping and both are considered unethical because of the unfair competition involved. Pre-Award Shopping . &nbsp;The first type is called pre-award bid shopping and occurs when a board or manager receives bids on a project and instead of awarding the contract to the best bid takes the lowest bid without the contractor&#39;s knowledge or approval and discloses it to other contractors. The board or manager &quot;shops&quot; the bid in an effort to get new proposals below the original bid. At that point, the board may award the contract to a new low bidder or squeeze everyone again with another round of bid shopping. Post-Award Shopping . &nbsp;The second type is called post-award bid shopping. This one is done by the general contractor after the association awards him the contract. It is done without the association&#39;s knowledge or approval. The general takes his subcontractors&#39; bids and shops them in an effort to drive down the costs he quoted the association. He does not pass the savings on to the association. Instead, he pockets the difference. Negative Impact . &nbsp;Using a legitimate bid to chisel down other bidders can significantly impact work quality. Contractors will cut corners by substituting cheaper materials and inexperienced labor in an effort to make a profit. Another problem is that most vendors will stop doing business with associations that bid shop. Managers . The Community Associations Institute (CAI) does not directly address bid shopping but its code of ethics is broad enough to cover the practice. Paragraph 14 of CAI&#39;s Professional Manager Code of Ethics states that managers shall &quot;Not engage in any form of price fixing, anti-trust, or anti-competition.&quot; Spec Bidding . &nbsp;&quot;Spec&quot; bidding used by some associations is not the same as bid shopping. Boards that want to budget for a future project may ask one or more contractors to provide a &quot;ballpark&quot; bid on the project. The contractors are told up front the purpose of the bid.It allows the association to set aside funds for capital improvements. Once they get closer to the actual project, formal bidding can take place and a contract awarded. There is nothing unethical with this practice. Boards should to be aware that informal bidding for budget purposes may not be very accurate since specifications at this early state are generally very loose or nonexistent. As a result, there may be significant changes in the budget once the project actually goes to formal bidding. Common Bidding Mistakes Roofing replacement, large waterproofing projects and other large maintenance projects tend to be costly. Because of the importance and cost of such work, boards need to avoid as many complications as possible. Following are common mistakes boards should avoid. 1.&nbsp;&nbsp; Soliciting Bids Without Specifications . This process results in bids that cannot be compared, causing confusion and poor decision making. A specification can be as small as one page for a small project and could be prepared by a professional community manager. But it must be complete and detailed for large projects (prepared by an architect or roofing consultant). The job specifications should be prepared only after the final product selection is made. Product manufacturers&rsquo; specifications are generic and cannot contain all the special details that every project has. The details are critical for roofing projects. 2.&nbsp; &nbsp; Signing Contracts Without Consulting Legal Counsel . This mistake is made by many associations attempting to save money. All major contracts should have, at minimum, a&nbsp;thorough review&nbsp;and comment by legal counsel. 3.&nbsp;&nbsp; Making the Manager the Project Manager for Major Construction . Community managers are well-trained in the duties of association management, especially those who have achieved their CCAM or PCAM. However, there is no formal training for them in management of construction projects. It takes years of training and experience to be a competent construction manager. Many of the largest management firms have a policy against their managers&rsquo; performing&nbsp; project management &nbsp;for construction due to high liability exposure for the firm. 4.&nbsp;&nbsp; Giving Large Deposits for Materials to Contractors . Many associations are led to believe they are obligated to give contractors material deposits before starting the project. This is a mistake that can place the CID&rsquo;s funds in jeopardy. All successful contractors have credit accounts with their suppliers, usually for 30 days or more. If a bidder cannot fund their payroll until the first payment, the association should reconsider doing business with that company. 5.&nbsp;&nbsp; Paying Percentage of Completion Instead of Measurable Work . Measuring the amount of progress in percentage is difficult for both parties, especially for the association and its manager. A good rule is to pay only for pre-agreed benchmarks of construction completed and materials verified onsite. 6.&nbsp;&nbsp; Failure to Start Planning in Advance of Need . This is a common mistake, and there are many reasons this can happen. Five years is not too early to start planning a major roof project. Better planning can help to limit or eliminate emergency assessments, disgruntled members and excess cost, not to mention delay causing high emergency repair costs. 7.&nbsp;&nbsp; Accepting Lowest Bid Without Proper Evaluation . Associations try to save themselves personal time by simply selecting the low bid, assuming all contractors are the same and bids are the same, which is not true. The lowest bid may have critical exclusions that could result in the highest final cost. Boards should meet with contractors and make sure they properly compare the strengths of the companies and their experience. 8.&nbsp;&nbsp; Believing that City Inspectors Ensure Proper Work . The typical city permit/inspection service is limited to a structural wood inspection and a final (completed) inspection. Seldom do city inspectors make sufficient job-in-progress visits to verify the work is done per code or manufacturer&rsquo;s specs. 9.&nbsp;&nbsp; Making Final Payment Without Closeout Documents . The closeout documents&nbsp;(permit, warranty, lien releases) should be demanded and a final payment withheld until they are in the manager&rsquo;s hands and verified correct for the project. There are&nbsp; two kinds of warranties : workmanship and product, and they are different documents. Nearly all local city or county building departments provide a signed-off permit card when they are notified the roof is done. Thank you to&nbsp;Carl Brown, CEO of&nbsp; AWS Consultants &nbsp;for contributing this information.&nbsp; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login