URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/B/Bad-Boards-Options

Bad Boards - Options You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME B Bad Boards - Options Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings DEALING WITH BAD BOARDS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Categories of Boards of Directors Exceptional Boards . Exceptional boards are not the norm. Being on top of everything all the time, consistently communicating with members, responding quickly to complaints and never making mistakes is not sustainable.&nbsp;Complaints about good and exceptional boards are most often from owners who don&#39;t like rules. Good Boards . Most boards are good boards. They volunteer their time, address community issues, and generally make good decisions. They enforce the rules, repair the common areas, and fund the reserves. However, they can be slow to act and sometimes make mistakes. Even so, they care about the membership and their intentions are good. Marginal Boards . There are a fair number of marginal boards. Their directors serve because no one else will. They put in their time and try to avoid difficult decisions. They minimize rule enforcement and avoid spending money. They rationalize that doing nothing keeps dues down. Many owners get frustrated with such boards but not enough to volunteer their own time to serve on the board. It&#39;s not until some crisis hits that more qualified volunteers step up. Dysfunctional Boards . Dysfunctional boards consist of directors who are at each other&#39;s throats. Nothing gets done because they are too busy fighting each other. There are strong personalities on differing sides of every issue and they are unyielding in their opinions. Sometimes they hate each other and engage in personal attacks. Each side develops a following and splits the community. Feelings run deep and it takes years to recover from the strife. Fortunately, dysfunctional boards are also few in number. Bad Boards . Fortunately, truly bad boards are few in number. They tend to be self-serving and driven by personal agendas. It has been my experience they don&#39;t follow legal advice and I eventually withdraw from representation (a polite way of saying I fire them). Once their path of destruction is visible to everyone, they usually get sued or thrown out of office, or both. A good board is then elected to clean up the mess. How to Deal With Bad Boards Sometimes boards go rogue, are punitive, or are just incompetent. Members who are unhappy with board decisions (or indecision) can do any or all of the following: Remain Silent . Be part of the silent majority... say nothing and do nothing and hope the problem goes away. Things run in cycles so sometimes this strategy works. You just have to be patient. Use Open Forum . Address the board in an&nbsp; open forum . Be respectful and clear in describing your position. The board may not be aware of the problem and bringing it to their attention should get results. If you are hostile, rambling, and make unreasonable demands or threats, the board will label you as a nut-job and reject your request. Write Letters . If the board does not respond to your open forum request, follow up with letters. Do this because the squeaky wheel gets the grease. Also, boards don&#39;t like paper trails that create potential liability. Keep your letters respectful and businesslike. Do not engage in personal attacks or exaggeration. You can also request a&nbsp; membership list &nbsp;and write to the membership and encourage them to send letters to the board. Be careful not to engage in defamation. Stick to the facts. Internal Dispute Resolution . If the open forum and follow-up letters don&#39;t resolve the problem, try&nbsp; internal dispute resolution . Even if IDR does not work, it keeps the issue in front of the board. Alternative Dispute Resolution . If IDR is unsuccessful, request&nbsp; alternative dispute resolution . This is more costly since it normally involves attorneys. Run for the Board . If the above actions don&#39;t resolve the issue or you don&#39;t want to involve attorneys,&nbsp;run for the board&nbsp;(or support responsible people who will). First, examine your motives. If the reason you want on the board is to get something for yourself at the expense of the community, that would be a&nbsp; conflict of interest &nbsp;which could lead to a breach of your&nbsp; fiduciary duties . Recall the Board . You can launch a&nbsp; recall of the board . This is a drastic measure and very disruptive to the community. It may permanently damage relationships with neighbors and create life-long enemies. Hence, your issue should be sufficiently serious that it cannot wait until the next annual meeting. Notify the State . Neither the Department of Real Estate nor the&nbsp; Office of the Attorney General &nbsp;has the interest or the jurisdiction to get involved in homeowner association disputes. According to an&nbsp; FAQ on the DRE&#39;s website , &quot;We suggest that members refer to their governing documents (articles, bylaws, declaration, etc.) for dispute resolution remedies. The California State Attorney General&#39;s office provides some oversight for incorporated homeowner associations. Depending on the nature of the problem, you may consider seeking the advice of a private attorney or contacting your local district attorney&#39;s office.&quot; Litigate . If none of the above works or you&#39;re in a hurry to lose money and make enemies, you can sue your association. You should be prepared that lawsuits are lengthy, expensive, emotionally draining, and unpredictable. So carefully weigh the cost of litigation against the hoped-for benefit... and then weigh it again. If you&#39;re suing to punish the board because of a perceived sleight or to prove a point, you&#39;re one of the crazies. If the board is involved in significant violations of the Davis-Stirling Act, members can (depending on the particular violation) file a complaint in&nbsp;small claims court&nbsp;or file an action in&nbsp;superior court. Move . If you live in a dysfunctional association (one where the community is badly splintered and there is endless&nbsp;litigation), sell your property and get out before they cause you financial and emotional ruin. Look for a home in a&nbsp; good association . Most associations are well-run and one will be a good fit for you. Or find a single-family home that&#39;s not in an association. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login