URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/B/Board-Quorum-Duty-to-Attend

Board Quorum - Duty to Attend You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME B Board Quorum - Duty to Attend Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings BOARD MEETING QUORUM Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Boards of Directors Board Meetings Committees Management Open&nbsp;Meetings Executive&nbsp;Sessions Emergency Meetings Zoom&nbsp;Meetings Emails Quorum Minutes Motions and&nbsp;Votes Meeting Notice &amp; Agenda Who Can Attend? Open Forum Recording&nbsp;Meetings Quorum Is Required Quorum Needed for Business . &quot;Unless otherwise provided in the articles or in the bylaws...an act or decision done or made by a majority of the directors present at a meeting duly held at which a quorum is present is the act of the board. The articles or bylaws may not provide that a lesser vote than a majority of the directors present at a meeting is the act of the board.&quot; ( Corp. Code &sect; 7211(a)(8) ) Quorum Defined . A &quot;quorum&quot; of the board is the required minimum number of directors who must be present before the board may conduct business. ( RONR (12th ed.) 40:1 )&nbsp;&quot;In the absence of a quorum, any business transacted (except for the procedural actions noted in the next paragraph) is null and void.&quot; ( RONR (12th ed.) 40:6 )&nbsp;Unless the articles of incorporation or bylaws state otherwise, &quot;a majority of the number of directors authorized in the bylaws constitutes a quorum of the board for the transaction of business.&quot; ( Corp. Code &sect; 7211(a)(7) ) A vacancy on the board does not change the number of directors needed to make a quorum--the board needs a majority of the number authorized in the bylaws, not a majority of actual directors. For example, if the bylaws call for a board of five directors, the quorum is three. If two directors resign, the quorum requirement for the three remaining directors is still three. If three out of five directors resign, the two remaining directors cannot conduct business because they do not constitute a quorum. Loss of a Quorum .&nbsp;An act or decision done or made by a majority of the directors present at a meeting duly held at which a&nbsp;quorum is present&nbsp;is the act of the board. The&nbsp;articles of incorporation or bylaws&nbsp;may not provide that a lesser vote than a majority of the directors present at a meeting is the act of the board. A meeting at which a quorum is initially present may continue to transact business notwithstanding the withdrawal of directors, if any action taken is approved by at least a majority of the required quorum for that meeting, or a greater number required by this division, the articles or the bylaws. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7211(a)(8) ) For example, a board of five directors needs three to establish a quorum. It then needs two of the three to approve any motion. If one of the three leaves the meeting, business may continue as long as the remaining two directors vote in unison. This can lead to mischief, with only two directors making decisions for the entire board. When this happens, a special meeting might need to be called at which all directors are present so they can reverse the decisions of the two directors. Duty to Attend Directors have a&nbsp; nondelegable duty &nbsp;to attend board meetings.&nbsp;Missing an occasional meeting is not a problem, but habitually missing meetings or refusing to attend is a breach of their&nbsp; fiduciary duties . Under&nbsp; Corporations Code &sect; 7231(a) ,&nbsp;&quot;A director&nbsp; shall &nbsp;perform the duties of a director . . .&quot; Under the Davis-Stirling Act, directors have a further duty to monitor the association&#39;s finances. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5500 ) His failure to attend meetings means he is missing the treasurer&#39;s report, not reviewing financial records, and not asking questions about finances--a further breach of his fiduciary duties. A person who consents to being a director and then refuses to participate loses the protections of&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 5800 . As such, the problem director may face personal liability if something happens. Director Proxies Not Allowed . Board members cannot send someone else in their place to attend board meetings and vote. It does not matter whether they have a signed power of attorney or not. A director&#39;s&nbsp;duty to attend board meetings&nbsp;and vote on board issues is&nbsp; nondelegable , i.e., it cannot be delegated or assigned to others. Bylaw Amendment . &nbsp;As provided for in&nbsp; Corporations Code &sect; 7151 , the membership can (i) prescribe&nbsp; qualifications for directors , including meeting attendance, and (ii) give your board the power to declare vacant the seat of any director who fails to meet those qualifications. Attendance by Phone . Directors can attend meetings by telephone, provided all directors can hear and participate in discussions. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7211(a)(6) ;&nbsp; Civ. Code &sect; 4090(b) ) There is no reason for directors to miss meetings since conference phones are inexpensive--including&nbsp;conference speakers for cell phones. Filling Empty Seats If enough seats become vacant (through death, resignation, or disqualification) such that there are not enough directors to meet quorum, the remaining directors&nbsp; can&nbsp;appoint up to three persons to fill empty seats. There are two exceptions to the power of the remaining directors to appoint replacements: The bylaws do not allow for appoints and require that all seats be filled by special election of the membership&nbsp;or The vacancies were caused by the action of the membership (a recall) rather than by the&nbsp;death or resignation of directors. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login