URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/B/Bylaw-Amendments

Bylaw Amendments You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME B Bylaw Amendments Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings HOA BYLAWS - PURPOSE & AMENDMENTS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Governing Documents Bylaws &amp; Articles CC&amp;Rs Bylaws Articles of Incorporation Statements of&nbsp; Information Suspended&nbsp; Corporations Purpose of Bylaws Bylaws establish policies and procedures for the governing of an association. They set&nbsp; qualifications for the election of directors , their number and term of office, their&nbsp;powers and duties, the&nbsp; appointment of officers , when and how meetings are held,&nbsp; quorum&nbsp; and voting requirements, the appointment of committees, etc. Bylaws are not recorded, nor are they filed with the Secretary of State. &quot;Statements of Information&quot; are filed with the Secretary of State. Unsigned Bylaws . Bylaws and articles of incorporation should be signed by the person who incorporates the association (usually the developer or someone retained by the developer to set up the association). Sometimes, the documents need to be signed. The lack of a signature does not invalidate the documents, but it can impact HUD/FHA and Fannie Mae&#39;s certification of the association for loans. If that happens, the current board of directors can &quot;ratify&quot; the existing documents as the official documents of the association and sign them. It should be done by board motion recorded in the minutes of the association.&nbsp; Recommendation : Boards should look at the last page of their bylaws and see if they are signed. If not, legal counsel can prepare a certification. Once that is done, the board should adopt a&nbsp; resolution &nbsp;authorizing the president and secretary to sign the certification, which is added to the bylaws. Bylaw Amendments and Restatements Amendments are reasonable when you only need a few. At some point, amendments are problematic because members often overlook them, and they don&#39;t address underlying structural problems with your documents. A restatement is slightly more expensive but gives you a clean, up-to-date document. It completely replaces your existing CC&amp;Rs and bylaws with an integrated set. Following are some of the significant changes you should expect: Cumulative voting &nbsp;is&nbsp;deleted; Quorum requirements &nbsp;for the election of directors are deleted; Director qualifications &nbsp;are added; Two-year&nbsp; staggered terms &nbsp;for directors is added; Nomination &nbsp;and election procedures are defined; Due Process &nbsp;requirements are&nbsp;defined for disciplinary actions;&nbsp;and Records inspection &nbsp;rights are defined. Board-Approved Amendments . The board of directors and the membership have authority to amend the Bylaws. The Davis-Stirling Act allows boards to unilaterally amend the bylaws ( and the CC&amp;Rs ) without a membership vote to eliminate discriminatory language and revise references to outdated statutory references in the Davis-Stirling Act. ( Civ.&nbsp;Code &sect; 4225 and Civ. Code &sect; 4235 ) In addition, in the absence of any provision in the bylaws limiting amendment powers solely to the membership&nbsp; ( Corp. Code &sect; 7150(c) ),&nbsp; boards have discretion to amend bylaws without a vote of the membership ( Corp.&nbsp;Code &sect; 7150(a) ) &nbsp;unless the amendment would :&nbsp; Materially and adversely affect the rights of members as to voting, dissolution, redemption, or transfer; Increase or decrease the number of members authorized in total or for any class; Effect an exchange, reclassification, or cancellation of all or part of the memberships; Authorize a new class of membership; or (or make other changes as specified in Corp. Code &sect;&nbsp;7150(a) ) Membership-Approved Amendments . The voting requirements for membership approval of bylaw amendments and restatements are normally found in an association&#39;s bylaws. If the bylaws fail to include an amendment provision, they may be amended by a majority of those members voting once a quorum has been established. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7150(b) ) Initiated by the Board . The board of directors almost always initiates amendments to the governing documents. Secret Ballot. Voting must be done by secret ballot&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 5100(a) ) by written election rules . ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(a) ) Unless an association&#39;s governing documents provide otherwise, balloting may be done entirely through the mail, with no voting at a meeting. Because voter turnout is a problem, boards can extend the voting period one or more times as needed. Effective Upon Notice . Bylaw amendments and restatements are effective upon notice to the membership . Unlike CC&amp;R amendments , bylaw amendments do not need to be recorded to be effective, nor must they be filed with the Secretary of State. Court-Approved Amendments . To seek court approval of bylaw amendments/restatements, a petition must be filed per&nbsp; Corporations Code &sect; 7515 .&nbsp; Challenging an Amendment Statute of Limitations . The statute of limitations for challenging an amendment is&nbsp;four years.&nbsp;( Code Civ. Proc. &sect; 337 )&nbsp;&nbsp; Code of Civil Procedure &sect; 343 &nbsp;provides, &quot;An action for relief not hereinbefore provided for must be commenced within four years after the cause of action shall have accrued.&quot;&nbsp; Lost Records . Sometimes, written proof of the proper adoption of amendments, rules, or architectural guidelines is lost. It may be due to poor record keeping, floods, fires, or turnover of management companies.&nbsp;If the amendment, rule, or guideline is challenged and no direct evidence of its approval or adoption can be found, associations can present circumstantial evidence that the amendment, rule, or guideline had been duly adopted. Unlike direct evidence, circumstantial evidence does not directly prove the fact in question. Instead, circumstantial evidence may support a logical conclusion that the disputed fact is true.&nbsp;[W]e find no legal support for the... claim that a common interest association is required to provide direct, rather than circumstantial evidence that its use restrictions were properly adopted in an action to enforce the restrictions. ( Clear Lake v. Cramer ) Miscellaneous &nbsp; Amending CC&amp;Rs Amending Rules &amp; Regulations Amending Condo Plans &amp; Parcel Maps ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login