URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/B/Bad-Faith-Unreasonable-Arbitrary-Frivolous

Bad Faith, Unreasonable, Arbitrary & Frivolous You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME B Bad Faith, Unreasonable, Arbitrary & Frivolous Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings REASONABLE, BAD FAITH, UNREASONABLE, ARBITRARY & FRIVOLOUS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Director Standards of Conduct As fiduciaries , board members are held to a higher standard than fellow homeowners. To avoid personal liability for their decisions, the Business Judgment Rule requires directors to act in good faith. Associations have a&nbsp; duty to enforce &nbsp;their governing documents. When an association seeks to enforce its CC&amp;Rs to compel an act by one of its owners, the association must show that (i) it followed its own standards and procedures prior to pursuing such a remedy, (ii) those procedures were&nbsp; fair and reasonable , (iii) its substantive decision was made in&nbsp;good faith&nbsp;and was&nbsp;reasonable, not arbitrary or capricious. Nor will courts enforce as&nbsp; equitable servitudes &nbsp;those restrictions that are arbitrary, that is, bearing no rational relationship to the protection, preservation, operation or purpose of the affected land. ( Laguna Royale v. Darger ) ...restrictions should be enforced unless they are wholly arbitrary, violate a fundamental public policy, or impose a burden on the use of affected land that far outweighs any benefit. ( Nahrstedt v. Lakeside Village ) ...enforcement of the restriction must be in good faith, not arbitrary or capricious, and by procedures which are fair and uniformly applied. ( Nahrstedt v. Lakeside Village ) &nbsp;...when an association determines that a unit owner has violated a use restriction, the association must do so in&nbsp;good faith,&nbsp;not in an arbitrary or capricious manner, and its enforcement procedures must be fair and applied uniformly.&nbsp;( Ironwood v. Solomon ) Enforcement of the restriction must be in&nbsp;good faith, not arbitrary or capricious, and by procedures which are fair and uniformly applied. The framework of reference, as the court made clear, is not the&nbsp; reasonableness specific to the objecting homeowner, but&nbsp;reasonableness&nbsp;as to the common interest development as a whole. ( Liebler v. Point Loma ) Good Faith - Bad Faith Good Faith Defined . The good faith element is sometimes referred to as bad faith or lack of good faith when the requirement is violated by a director. A board member can be negligent carrying out his duties as a director and not be liable but if he acts in bad faith he can be held accountable for his actions. &quot;Good Faith&quot; is defined as: ...an intangible and abstract quality...encompass[ing], among other things, an honest belief, the absence of malice and absence of design to defraud or to seek an unconscionable advantage...Honesty of intention... ( Pugh v. See&#39;s Candies, Inc. (1988) 203 Cal.App.3d 743, 763-764, quoting Black&#39;s Law Dictionary (5th ed. 1979) pp.623 and 127) Bad Faith Defined .&nbsp;What does it mean to act in bad faith? &quot;Bad faith&quot; is the opposite of &quot;good faith.&quot; It generally implies or involves actual or constructive fraud, or a design to mislead or deceive another, or a neglect or refusal to fulfill some duty or some contractual obligation, not prompted by an honest mistake as to one&#39;s rights or duties, but by some interested or sinister motive. &quot;Bad faith&quot; is not simply bad judgment or negligence, but rather it implies the conscious doing of a wrong because of dishonest purpose or moral obliquity; it is different from the negative idea of negligence in that it contemplates a state of mind affirmatively operating with furtive design or ill will. ( Pugh v. See&#39;s Candies, Inc. (1988) 203 Cal.App.3d 743, 763-764, quoting Black&#39;s Law Dictionary (5th ed. 1979) pp.623 and 127) An example is for a board to knowingly cause a contractor to breach his contract with the association so the association can cancel the agreement and enter into a less expensive one with another roofer. The board is arguably acting in the best interests of the association (saving money by reducing the cost of the construction project) but they are doing so in bad faith. As a result, the contractor can sue for damages. This happened to an association making extensive repairs following the Northridge Earthquake. The damages awarded to the contractor were substantial and drove the association to the edge of bankruptcy. Following is another example: The trial court found the Association did not act in good faith based on inferences it drew from the fact that (1) no one from the Architectural Committee actually visited the site until long after the initial decision to require removal was made and well into the ADR process; (2) the Association acted upon and denied the Grossmans&#39; appeal even while the ADR process was ongoing (which violated the spirit of Civ. Code, &sect; 1363.820); and (3) the Association&#39;s decision was partially based on the Grossmans&#39; failure to secure prior approval from the Architectural Committee. The record contains sufficient evidence to establish each of these facts. Therefore, substantial evidence (albeit circumstantial) supports the trial court&#39;s finding regarding the absence of good faith. This evidence and finding regarding the lack of good faith adequately supports the trial court&#39;s ultimate finding that the Association&#39;s decision was arbitrary and capricious. ( Grossman v. Park Fort Washington ) Bad Faith Invasion of Privacy . Another example is when a director takes private information from executive session and leaks it to the membership in the name of &quot;transparency&quot; because members have a &quot;right&quot; to know what occurred in executive session. Actually, they don&#39;t. Disclosing confidential information violates the law regarding executive sessions . If the association is sued for invasion of privacy, intentional infliction of emotional distress, etc., the misbehaving director could lose the protections of the Business Judgment Rule and be held personally liable for damages resulting from his unauthorized disclosures. Interested Director . Another example of bad faith is when a director makes a decision that benefits the director at the expense of the association. For example, the director and persuades the board to award a contract to a roofing company without disclosing he has an ownership interest in the company, Reasonable, Unreasonable, Arbitrary, and Capricious Reasonable Defined . &quot;Reasonable&quot; is defined as fair, proper, just, moderate, suitable under the circumstances . . . not immoderate or excessive . . . rational, honest, equitable, fair, suitable . . .&nbsp;- Black&#39;s Law Dictionary.&nbsp; &quot;Reasonable Care&quot; is that degree of care which a person of ordinary prudence would exercise in the same or similar circumstances. - Black&#39;s Law Dictionary.&nbsp; There is no formula for the determination of reasonableness. Yet standards of this kind are not impermissively vague, provided their meaning can be objectively ascertained by reference to common experiences of mankind.&quot; ( People v. Daniels &nbsp;(1969) 71 Cal.2d 1119, 1129) Unreasonable Defined. &nbsp;&quot;Unreasonable&nbsp;is&nbsp;defined&nbsp;as those restrictions which are wholly arbitrary, violate a fundamental public policy, or impose a burden on the use of affected land that far outweighs any benefit.&quot; ( Liebler v. Point Loma Tennis Club &nbsp;(1995) 40 Cal. App. 4th 1600, 1604) Frivoulous Defined .&nbsp;The terms &ldquo;frivolous, unreasonable, and without reason&rdquo; are frequently used in fee-shifting statutes.&nbsp; Smith v. Selma Community Hospital &nbsp;(2010) 188 Cal.App.4th 1, articulates an applicable legal standard for frivolous within the context of Business and Professions Code section 809.9, which awards attorney fees to a prevailing party &ldquo;if the other party&rsquo;s conduct in bringing, defending, or litigating the suit was frivolous, unreasonable, without foundation, or in bad faith.&rdquo; The court concluded &ldquo;a matter is frivolous if any reasonable attorney would agree it is completely without merit in the sense that it lacks legal grounds, lacks an evidentiary showing, or involves an unreasonable delay.&rdquo; ( Retzloff v. Moulton Parkway Assn ) Arbitrary &amp; Capricious .&nbsp;&nbsp;An arbitrary decision is one based on random choice or personal whim. &quot;Willful and unreasoning action, without consideration and regard for facts and circumstances presented . . . bad faith or failure to exercise honest judgment.&quot; - Black&#39;s Law Dictionary . Being Capricious means being subject to whim; impulsive and unpredictable.&nbsp;&quot;A willful and unreasonable action without consideration or in disregard of facts or law or without determining principle.&quot; - Black&#39;s Law Dictionary ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login