URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/C/Condo-Conversion-Process

Condo Conversion Process You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME C Condo Conversion Process Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings CONDO CONVERSIONS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Contractor Issues Developer Issues Developer&nbsp;Transition Transfer&nbsp;of Records Annexations Condo Conversions Construction&nbsp;Defects Funding Defect Litigation SB 800&nbsp;Repairs Settlement Disclosure Benefits of Condo Conversion For many reasons, condominiums are generally more marketable than co-ops, which is why stock cooperatives and community apartment (i.e., own-your-own) projects often convert to condominiums. Although there may be many reasons for converting, the primary incentive is greater ease of financing, which leads to higher property values. Instead of a single mortgage on the entire property with shares of stock held by tenants (the stock cooperative model), members actually own real estate in the form of air space bounded by the walls, ceilings, and floors of a unit.&nbsp;This gives owners more conventional collateral for a loan, which makes it much easier to finance as well as buy and sell units. The benefits are summarized below: Lenders . Lenders are more willing to lend higher amounts for condominiums than co-op apartments, and rates charged by lenders for residential mortgage loans are generally lower than rates for underlying co-op building mortgages. &nbsp; Buyers . Prospective buyers of condominiums don&#39;t have the rigorous purchase application and interview processes that co-ops do. &nbsp; Lower Dues . Dues are lower because a condominium association&#39;s operating budget is generally lower than a co-op&#39;s (because it does not include property taxes which are paid by individual owners). The downside to conversion is the initial cost of the conversion itself.&nbsp;The fees for lawyers and engineers, title insurance, mortgage costs, and other associated costs can be significant.&nbsp;However, the resultant increase in property values can also be significant. Because condominiums have a wider market appeal, they generally sell for 15 to 25% more on average than co-ops. Conversion Process There is a difference between a rental apartment building conversion to condos and a co-op or community apartment (own-your-owns) conversion to condos. Apartments involve subdivision approval and public hearings through the local city. For co-ops and own-your-owns, most are exempt from the subdivision process and may involve only a minimal application process through the city.&nbsp;Following is an outline of the documents and procedures necessary to convert a stock cooperative to condominiums: 1. &nbsp; Member Approval . &nbsp;Pursuant to Gov. Code &sect; 66452.10 , unless the project management documents specify differently, to convert a stock cooperative to a condominium project requires approval by a majority vote of the owners in the project, and trustees or beneficiaries of each recorded deed of trust and mortgagee of each recorded mortgage in the cooperative. 2. &nbsp;&nbsp; Blanket Trust Deed Holder . &nbsp;If there is a blanket deed of trust recorded against the stock cooperative, the beneficiary of the deed of trust must be dealt with before a conversion can occur.&nbsp;The loan secured by the deed of trust may be paid off and the loan reconveyed; the deed of trust may be amended to allow partial reconveyance as each condominium is converted; or the deed of trust may be replaced by a new deed of trust with partial release provisions. 3. &nbsp;&nbsp; Civil Engineering Work . &nbsp;Unless otherwise exempted, the conversion of the Project to condominiums requires compliance with the Subdivision Map Act, necessitating the approval of a subdivision map or a certificate of compliance by the city.&nbsp;There is one exemption found in the Government Code that could exclude your project from Map Act requirements. This exception requires: a.&nbsp; At least 51% of the units were occupied by stockholders of the cooperative (or individually owned) on January 1, 1981; b.&nbsp; No more than 25% of the shares in the cooperative were owned by any one person on January 1, 1981; c.&nbsp; A person renting a unit at the time of conversion must be given all rights to which tenants are entitled under state or local law; and d.&nbsp; The the city (or county) certifies that these requirements are met.&nbsp; A condominium plan, consisting of a diagrammatic airspace plan of the project units, must be prepared and recorded.&nbsp;If the bylaws or organization documents of the stock cooperative do not specify otherwise, a majority of the owners in the cooperative must sign the condominium plan. 4. &nbsp;&nbsp; Condominium Management Documents . &nbsp;A new nonprofit &quot;Condominium Association&quot; should be formed to act as the new homeowners association for the Project once it is converted to condominiums.&nbsp;To implement the conversion to condominiums, it will be necessary to draft a condominium declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions and reservation of easements (&quot;CC&amp;Rs&quot;) for the project and articles of incorporation and bylaws for the new condominium association.&nbsp;These documents can be substantively similar to the provisions of your existing project management documents, subject to such modifications as are necessary to reflect the condominium form of ownership and to comply with applicable statutes and regulations.&nbsp;If the bylaws or organization documents of the stock cooperative do not specify otherwise, a majority of the owners in the cooperative must sign the CC&amp;Rs. 5. &nbsp;&nbsp; Condominium Deeds .&nbsp;When the condominium plan and the CC&amp;Rs have been recorded, the Association may then convey each condominium unit to its respective owner by grant deed.&nbsp;If the bylaws or organization documents of the stock cooperative do not specify otherwise, a majority of the owners in the cooperative must sign the conveyance documents. 6. &nbsp;&nbsp; Trust Deed Amendments . &nbsp;Any trust deed evidencing financing provided to an individual owner secured by a cooperative unit must be amended to revise the legal description of the property being encumbered. Such an amendment must be executed by the unit owner and the mortgagee and recorded in the official records. 7.&nbsp; Department of Real Estate . &nbsp;The Department of Real Estate (&quot;DRE&quot;) has asserted jurisdiction over the conversion of a stock cooperative to a condominium project.&nbsp;Hence, the Association must obtain a Final Public Report from the DRE before condominium units may be offered to the members of the association. The following documents must be prepared and submitted to the DRE to complete the conversion: a. &nbsp; CC&amp;Rs b. &nbsp; Articles of Incorporation c. &nbsp;&nbsp; Bylaws d. &nbsp; Form of quitclaim and lease termination which will terminate each owner&#39;s interest in his or her cooperative unit in the project. e. &nbsp;&nbsp; Form of grant deed conveying a condominium unit to each owner in the project. f. &nbsp;&nbsp; Form of first amendment to deeds of trust secured by cooperative units in the project which will amend the deeds of trust so that they each encumber the appropriate condominium units. g. &nbsp;&nbsp; Form of Special Power of Attorney to use to obtain consents of the members and the lenders to the Condominium Plan, CC&amp;Rs, deeds of condominium units, quitclaim deeds and other documents required to convert the project to a condominium project. 8. &nbsp;&nbsp; Additional Costs . &nbsp;Additional costs in the conversion include the preparation of title reports for individual units and miscellaneous recording fees and documentary transfer tax when the quitclaim deeds and condominium deeds are recorded. 9.&nbsp; Timing . The process generally takes 1 to 2 years to complete. 10.&nbsp; Maintenance Responsibilities . &nbsp;Maintenance responsibilities will generally remain the same.&nbsp;Owners will be responsible for maintaining their units and the association will be responsible for maintaining the common areas. Condo Conversion Flowchart Stock Cooperative and Own-Your-Own Conversion Flowchart courtesy Timothy Murakami, Esq. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login