URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/C/Clubhouse-Rental-Insurance

Clubhouse Rental Insurance You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME C Clubhouse Rental Insurance Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings HOA CLUBHOUSES Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Rules &amp; Regulations Renters Pets Daycare, Drones, Flags Vehicles Clubhouse, Gym, Pool Nuisance Issues Clotheslines, Gardens, Turf &nbsp; Clubhouse Rental Gym Equipment Movies, Music &amp; Internet Playgrounds Pools &amp; Spas Trails Inflatable Bounce House Eliminating Amenities Renting Common Area Facilities QUESTION : If a board grants a member exclusive use of the association&#39;s clubhouse for a particular activity, does that constitute an exclusive use of the common area requiring approval of 67% of the membership under the Davis Stirling Act? ANSWER : Some associations allow facilities to be rented for weddings, birthday parties, etc. This is not an exclusive use easement&nbsp;described in Civil Code &sect; 4600 . Instead, it&#39;s a short-term license. It allows a member to use the facilities for a limited purpose for a limited period of time. Members who reserve the facilities are sometimes charged a rental fee by the association. Rental Agreement Many associations require written agreements for private events. The agreement includes provisions holding the association harmless, indemnifying the association, and establishing hours of use, noise, trash, parking, and insurance. Special Event Insurance Optimally, the owner should produce evidence of both bodily injury and property damage liability coverage and agree to have his insurance carrier name the association as an &quot;additional insured.&quot; Unfortunately, it&#39;s nearly impossible (except for the most expensive of carriers) to get a company writing a personal lines homeowners policy to add an endorsement extending coverage to a common interest development. As a result, more communities require the owner to purchase a one-day special event policy that names both the owner and the association as insured. These policies are readily available and are written for all kinds of special events, including weddings, anniversaries, birthday parties, bar mitzvahs, etc. Cost of Insurance . The cost of a special event insurance policy can range from $250 to $400, with the premium dependent upon the number of guests, the type and extent of celebrating (music/dancing), and whether or not food and alcohol are being served. Alcohol has the single greatest potential for liability. As a result, some associations prohibit alcoholic beverages, even when the event is catered, and the server is licensed and insured. Having the association named as an &quot;additional insured&quot; is important since most boards do not want claim activity from parties to spoil the association&#39;s insurance loss history. Alcohol at Association Events Associations are allowed to serve alcohol at their events as long as they (i) are not selling the alcohol, (ii) are not charging admission to attend, and (iii) are not serving anyone under the age of 21. &quot;No social host who furnishes alcoholic beverages to any person may be held legally accountable for damages suffered by that person, or for injury to the person or property of, or death of, any third person, resulting from the consumption of those beverages.&quot; ( Civ. Code &sect; 1714(c) )&nbsp;Wine and cheese served at annual meetings or beer at association picnics rarely create a problem. However, if an association serves hard liquor, the likelihood of an incident increases, and the risk of litigation goes up, especially if participants drove to the event. Charging Admission . If an association charges admission to an event where it is serving alcohol, it can be liable for injuries or deaths that may occur as a result of alcohol consumption. ( Ennabe v. Manosa ) If money changes hands, whether charging admission, charging for drinks, or accepting &quot;donations&quot; for the event, the association&#39;s exposure to liability is significantly increased. Obviously Intoxicated . Serving alcohol to an obviously intoxicated participant could result in a misdemeanor : &quot;Every person who sells, furnishes, gives, or causes to be sold, furnished, or given away, any alcoholic beverage to any habitual or common drunkard or to any obviously intoxicated person is guilty of a misdemeanor.&quot; ( Bus. &amp; Prof. Code &sect; 25602(a) ) Catering . If the association hires a bartender or caterer to serve food and alcohol, the board should make sure the person/company has insurance and the association is named as additional insured for the event. The board should also contact the association&#39;s insurance agent to find out if the amount of insurance is sufficient and if the association should purchase its own coverage for the event. BYOB Events . Sometimes associations will hold events where members are allowed to &quot;Bring Your Own Beverage.&quot; Even though the association is not serving alcohol, there continues to be exposure to liability if participants get drunk and injuries occur. Participants should be told they cannot bring liquor to the event, only beer or wine. Volunteers should be assigned to watch for anyone who is visibly drunk and gently guide them home. The board should make sure the association&#39;s insurance will cover any alcohol related injuries. Liquor License . For information about liquor licenses, see California&#39;s website for Alcoholic Beverage Control . Insurance . General liability policies do not cover liquor liability. Associations need to obtain &quot;host liquor liability&quot; insurance. This is a special liability form that covers individuals or organizations (not engaged in the business of distilling, selling or distributing alcoholic beverages) that sponsor or host events where liquor is served without charging for it. Special event insurance can be purchased through the association&#39;s insurance agent or through &quot; The Event Helper .&quot; Recommendations. If the association is sued, it may ultimately avoid liability, but it will have to endure the litigation. It is better to avoid the problem altogether by limiting the alcohol to beer and wine and not allowing guests to consume too much. Whenever the association is serving alcohol at an event, the board should take some sensible precautions to minimize potential liability. Some of those precautions include: make the premises safe, invite members only, not the general public, do not charge admission, do not charge for the drinks, serve only beer and/or wine (and non-alcoholic drinks and food), establish a 2-drink limit (handout two drink tickets per attendee), do not serve anyone under the age of 21 (check IDs), do not serve a visibly intoxicated person, stop serving alcohol well in advance of the event&#39;s ending time,&nbsp; provide transportation home for those who may need it, and take out host liquor liability insurance for the event. Alcohol at Private Events Sometimes owners will reserve the common areas for a private party that may include the serving of alcohol. As part of its application for reserving the clubhouse or any other common areas for private events, associations should include an&nbsp; indemnity and hold harmless agreement . The agreement protects the association in the event that there are injuries or losses arising from the event.&nbsp;The hold harmless portion of the agreement means the host agrees not to file claims against the association. The indemnity portion means the host will pay the association&#39;s legal fees and any judgment in the event a third party sues the association.&nbsp;Associations can also require the event sponsor to take out insurance for the event and name the association as &quot;additional insured.&quot; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login