URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/C/Collection-Policy

Collection Policy You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME C Collection Policy Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings COLLECTION POLICY Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Annual Budgets Collections Audits &amp; Reviews Bank Accounts &amp; Loans Reserves Taxes Collection&nbsp;Policy Owner&#39;s Duty&nbsp; to Pay Late Charges &amp; Interest Partial Payments Foreclosure Process Bankruptcy Duty to Collect Assessments Duty to Levy Assessments . Boards of directors have a duty to levy regular and special assessments sufficient to maintain the common areas. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5600(a) ) Importance of Collection . Since HOAs are entirely dependent upon the regular and timely payment of assessments by all homeowners, California courts recognize the need to collect those assessments: &quot;These statutory provisions reflect the Legislature&#39;s recognition of the importance of assessments to the proper functioning of condominiums in this state. Because homeowners associations would cease to exist without regular payment of assessment fees, the Legislature has created procedures for associations to quickly and efficiently seek relief against a nonpaying owner.&quot; ( Park Place Estates Homeowners Ass&#39;n v. Naber (1994) 29 Cal.App.4th 427, 432) Protect Membership&#39;s Interest . &nbsp;To protect its membership against increased assessments and reduced services and to preserve the association&#39;s ability to borrow, boards must&nbsp; record liens &nbsp;on delinquent owners and initiate&nbsp;collection actions. Compromise and Waiver . Boards can establish&nbsp; payment plans , waive fees, and compromise delinquent assessments owed by members to the association. However, boards need a&nbsp;reasonable basis for such actions, and they must be in the association&#39;s best interests. Negative Impact of Delinquent Assessments Burdens Members . Uncollected assessments are an asset belonging to the membership. Failure by the board to collect that asset puts a burden on paying members who must make up the difference in the association&#39;s budget. Uncollected assessments can result in higher dues, special assessments, and reduced services. Leaving delinquent assessments uncollected for too long&nbsp;can result in&nbsp;bad debt. High delinquency rates and poor collection efforts can also negatively impact the association&#39;s ability to borrow money.&nbsp; Bad Debt . Assessments (regular and special) that are unlikely to be repaid, either because the debtor doesn&#39;t have any money or because the debtor cannot be found, are classified as &quot;bad debt.&quot;&nbsp;Associations may eventually recoup delinquent assessments through their collection efforts. In some instances, the debt is uncollectible. Rather than carry the delinquent amounts on their books, associations should write off the receivable as &quot;bad debt.&quot; During economic downturns, some associations include a line item in their annual budget for estimated bad debt. This increases the assessments on all owners but allows the association to pay its operating expenses without imposing special assessments. Bad debts appear as an expense on the association&#39;s income statement. FHA Guidelines . The maximum delinquency rate allowed under&nbsp;FHA guidelines is 15%. It means associations with high delinquency&nbsp;rates will be excluded from loan products involving&nbsp;federally insured mortgages. Although some private&nbsp;lenders allow delinquency rates above 15%,&nbsp;the added risk the lender absorbs will be reflected&nbsp;in the rates and terms of these loans, making&nbsp;them more expensive than traditional loans.&nbsp;Realtors and sophisticated buyers will review an association&#39;s financial statement and its reserve funding levels before making an offer on a unit. Collection Policy Collection Policy Required .&nbsp;To carry out their duties to the membership, boards must establish a&nbsp;collection policy&nbsp;and then properly implement it.&nbsp;When an owner defaults, the association may record a lien on the owner&#39;s interest for the amount of the fees. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5675) ) If the default is not corrected, the association may pursue any remedy permitted by law, including judicial foreclosure or foreclosure by private power of sale. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5675 )&nbsp;The Davis-Stirling Act requires that associations adopt and then annually distribute a statement of assessment collection policies required by&nbsp; Section 5730 .&nbsp;A statement describing the association&rsquo;s policies and practices in enforcing lien rights or other legal remedies for default in the payment of assessments. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5310 (a)(6) &amp; (7))&nbsp;Associations should consider suspending common area privileges for unpaid fees, fines, and assessments as one of their inducements for owners to pay the association&#39;s monies owed. Failure to Adopt Policy . Although the statute requires a collection policy, it does not provide a penalty for failing to do so. However, if an association without a collection policy tried to collect late fees against delinquent members and foreclose on units, it would likely lose a legal challenge.&nbsp;In an unpublished decision involving the collection of delinquent assessments, the Court of Appeals noted that before an association can record a lien on a property to collect delinquent assessments, it must, among other things, notify the owner in writing of the association&#39;s collection practices. In the Gurich case, the delinquent owner testified that she had not received the association&#39;s collection policy. The court found that the board could not provide sufficient evidence that it had sent her the policy. Accordingly, the lower court&#39;s award to the association of $41,818.29 plus fees and costs of $15,451.25 was reversed. In addition, the association had to pay the delinquent owner&#39;s costs on appeal. ( T.D. Service v. Gurich ) Necessary Elements . The policy must include the association&#39;s policy for payment plans , imposing late charges and interest , the owner&#39;s right to dispute the delinquency, their right to internal dispute resolution , and their right to request alternative dispute resolution . ( Civ. Code &sect; 5660 ) Fee Schedule Details . As part of an association&#39;s assessment collection policy, a detailed list of late fees, interest, collection, and management fees can be included in the collection policy, but is not required. According to Civil Code &sect; 5310(a)(6) and 5310(a)(7) , associations must distribute information on collection policies and procedures to the membership. Section (a)(6) specifically requires distribution of the &quot;Notice Assessments and Foreclosure&quot; set forth in Civil Code &sect; 5730 .&nbsp;This notice requirement is somewhat general, but does review many of the specific code sections controlling the collection of delinquent assessments. Section (a)(7) requires the distribution of &quot;A statement describing the association&#39;s policies and practices in enforcing lien rights or other legal remedies for default in the payment of assessments.&quot;&nbsp;However, this latter section does not specify how detailed a description must be. Collection policies can vary from one page to ten pages or more. A specific listing of the exact amount of fees and costs is not required. Too much detail can make it difficult to comply 100% with the policy. These two sections are not to be confused with Civil Code &sect; 5310(a)(8) and &sect; 5850 , which require the distribution of a specific schedule of monetary penalties (fines) . Give Annual Notice . Associations must annually distribute their collection policies to the membership.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 5310 (a)(6) &amp; (7)) Stock Cooperatives .&nbsp;The delinquent assessments of shareholders apply to their units (separate interests). As such, a lien can be filed against their unit and foreclosed if assessments remain unpaid. The unit&#39;s legal description should include the entire property&#39;s legal description plus a reference to the shareholder&rsquo;s share certificate, occupancy agreement, proprietary lease, or any other document giving the owner exclusive use of a particular unit. And to the extent that any interest in the unit is evidenced by personal property, i.e., shares of stock, such property will be included in the foreclosure sale. CONTACT US &nbsp;for a Collection Policy &nbsp; One Action Rule California has a &quot;One-Action Rule&quot; (sometimes referred to as &quot;Single-Action Rule&quot;), which requires that the holder of a claim secured by real property proceed against the property first before pursuing the debtor personally. ( Code Civ. Proc. &sect; 726(a) ) When an association records a lien, it becomes the holder of a claim secured by real property, but there is an express waiver of the &quot;one-action rule&quot; (also known as &quot;the security first rule) in the Davis-Stirling Act. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5700(b) ) Accordingly, an association can pursue the debtor (homeowner) personally even if it has recorded an&nbsp; assessment lien. Selecting a Remedy . There are three legal remedies for collecting a debt: foreclose nonjudicially (a trustee&rsquo;s sale), foreclose judicially, or sue the homeowner for a money judgment. Because of the exception described above, associations can start more than one collection effort. Even so, the board must ultimately select one remedy. For example, associations can&nbsp; record a lien &nbsp;against a unit &nbsp;and initiate foreclosure and simultaneously file a lawsuit to recover unpaid assessments. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5720(b) ) However, at some point, the association must select its remedy. If the foreclosure results in a sale, the association must dismiss its lawsuit. Alternatively, if the lawsuit results in a judgment, the association must stop the foreclosure. Judicial Foreclosure . &nbsp;If the association wants to foreclose but also wants a deficiency judgment, it must pursue&nbsp;judicial foreclosure&nbsp;rather than nonjudicial foreclosure. However, a deficiency judgment may have no value if it is uncollectible. Boards should consult with legal counsel on the best course to follow. Methods of Assessment Collection &nbsp; &nbsp; Judicial Foreclosure Non-Judicial Foreclosure Money Judgment Suspend Privileges Remedy HOA forces the sale of a unit/lot via the courts. Judicial foreclosure is useful when the amount owed is significant, and the association wants to replace a nonpaying owner with a paying one. HOA sells property via trustee sale . Like Judicial foreclosure, nonjudicial foreclosure is useful when the amount owed is significant, and the association wants to replace a nonpaying owner with a paying one. HOA receives a money judgment. Generally, small claims and superior court actions are successful when used early in the process with owners who can afford to pay. The owner voluntarily pays the delinquent assessment Benefits If the property has insufficient equity, a deficiency judgment is awarded, allowing the HOA to collect by sale of personal property, wage garnishment, rent levy, bank levy, etc. The timeline and costs are greatly reduced if the owner fails to respond and the&nbsp;HOA obtains a default judgment. Less expensive than judicial foreclosure. If no bidders, the&nbsp;HOA acquires the&nbsp;property (subject to a 90-day right of redemption ) and can rent or sell the property. Although the&nbsp;HOA is not required to pay senior loans and property taxes, if lien holders go unpaid, they may foreclose on the property and terminate the HOA&#39;s ownership. Can include fines and penalties. Judgment can be obtained fairly quickly, but debt is unsecured until an abstract of judgment is recorded. Collectible through wage garnishment, bank levy, etc. There is no cost to the association. 1st Step Record a lien ($300-$500) to secure the debt. Record a lien &nbsp;to secure the debt. Record a lien&nbsp;to secure the debt. &nbsp;Record a lien&nbsp;to secure the debt, then hold a hearing with the delinquent owner. Action A lawsuit is filed in superior court. The process takes place without court or attorney involvement. HOA sues the&nbsp;owner in small claims or superior court. Common area privileges are suspended . Potential Problems Owners must be personally served. It can be more expensive, especially if there is&nbsp;no equity in the&nbsp;property and the deficiency judgment turns out to be noncollectable. The delinquency must be at least $1,800 &nbsp;or any amount over twelve months delinquent before the foreclosure may begin. Recovery is limited to the sale of property. Buyers take the property&nbsp;subject to the right of redemption . Collection efforts on the judgment require additional legal expenses and are often uncollectable. They are avoidable if the owner declares bankruptcy. Owner may try to violate the suspension.&nbsp; Average Timeline 200-400 days (unless owner defaults, then ~90 days) 9 months-1 year&nbsp; 90-180 days (unless vigorously opposed) 10-day notice of hearing,&nbsp;then notice of suspension within 15 days of hearing. &nbsp; Confidentiality and&nbsp;Publishing Delinquent Owners&#39; Names There are two ways to inform the membership about delinquencies. Parcel Number . The more conservative approach is not to identify delinquents by name. The association can publish a list of all the delinquencies by identifying each property using the assessor&#39;s parcel number (APN). The amount owed by each can also be listed. The list should also contain the following disclaimer: &quot;This information was last updated on ___&lt;date&gt;___. Payments made after this date are not reflected.&quot; Delinquent Taxpayer Method . For those who want to publish names, look at how California handles delinquent taxpayers. According to the state&#39;s website, California mails each person on its list a certified letter providing them an opportunity to pay their taxes before the list is published. To avoid being published, taxpayers must do one of the following: (i) pay the liability in full, (ii) establish an installment agreement, (iii) enter into an offer in compromise, or (iv) substantiate a bankruptcy filing. With that in mind, associations could do the following: Amend the governing documents to include publishing names as one of its collection policies. Amend its&nbsp;collection policy&nbsp;to include sending a certified letter and return receipt requested to the owner, allowing the person&nbsp;to pay before the list is published. Distribute or mail the list to members only (not renters). Do not post it in the common areas where visitors can see it. Title the list &quot;Delinquent Owners.&quot; Do not characterize owners as &quot;Deadbeats of the Month&quot; or any other pejorative term, and do not state whether foreclosure has commenced against their units. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5705(c) ) Include a disclaimer such as: &quot;This information was last updated on ____. Payments made after&nbsp;are not reflected.&quot; Be consistent in publishing names (perhaps quarterly) and even-handedly by publishing all names, including directors (unless the person has paid in full, worked out a payment plan, or declared bankruptcy). Recommendation : Boards should seek legal counsel before publishing the names of delinquent owners. Annual Notice Required Associations must disclose their policies and practices in enforcing lien rights and other legal remedies for collecting delinquent assessments such as money judgments and suspending privileges . Their policy must be delivered annually&nbsp;to the members not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days immediately preceding the beginning of the association&#39;s fiscal year. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5310 ; &sect; 5730 ) Statute of Limitations for Collecting Debt There are different statutes of limitations when it comes to collecting debt. If money is borrowed and a promise made orally to repay the debt, the statute of limitations is two years. ( Code Civ. Proc. &sect; 339 ) If parties enter a written agreement, the SOL is four years. ( Code Civ. Proc. &sect; 337 ) When the obligation is the result of&nbsp;recorded restrictions, e.g., an obligation created by CC&amp;Rs, the SOL is five years. ( Code Civ. Proc. &sect; 336(b) ,&nbsp; Pacific Hills HOA vs. Prun ) Accordingly, an association has five years to initiate action to collect delinquent assessments. However, if a court views the obligation as a written contract, the statute of limitations is four years. Start Date for SOL : When evaluating issues related to&nbsp;statutes of limitation, there are (at least) two important issues: (1) determining the time period after which an action is barred&nbsp;and (2) determining when that period starts running. Generally, the time period starts when there is an actionable wrong, such as a breach of contract or violation of the CC&amp;Rs. However, in some cases, the time period can run from a later date, especially in cases of &quot;delayed discovery&quot; or in the case of certain types of billed accounts (&quot;account stated&quot;). Boards should consult with an attorney to determine if an actionable wrong is too old to pursue. Recommendation : Uncollected debt is harder to collect&nbsp;the older it gets. Plus, it burdens the membership (who must make up the difference in the budget), and skews an association&#39;s financial statement. If it&#39;s&nbsp;bad debt, associations should write it off. If it&#39;s collectible, boards need to pick a&nbsp;collection method&nbsp;and pursue the debt in accordance with the association&#39;s&nbsp;collection policy. To fulfill their&nbsp;duties as directors, boards should diligently collect delinquent assessments. HOA Fair Debt Collection Practices The Fair Debt Collection Practices Act (FDCPA) prohibits debt collectors from making false or misleading representations and from engaging in abusive and unfair practices in collecting consumer debt. Violations of the Act can result in fines and damages against the association, plus attorneys&#39; fees . FDCPA Applies to&nbsp;Assessments, Not Fines . Associations that hire third parties to collect delinquent assessments, such as lawyers, collection companies, and management companies, are governed by the FDCPA. In&nbsp; Thies v. Law Offices of William A. Wyman &nbsp;(SD Cal 1997) 969 F.Supp. 604, the court held that homeowner association assessments fall under the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act. The FDCPA requires that certain disclosures be made to homeowners. In addition, debt collectors are prohibited from making harassing telephone calls, making idle threats, directly contacting owners represented by counsel, etc.&nbsp;Fines are nonconsensual and are not consumer-related since they arise from a violation of the association&#39;s internal rules. Accordingly, fines are not debt for purposes of the FDCPA. ( Nabatmama v. Ross Morgan ) Routine Collection Activities. Routine HOA assessment activities by associations do not require a license.&nbsp;The&nbsp;DFPI&#39;s website&nbsp;posted FAQs that: Routine HOA assessments do not constitute a consumer credit transaction under the Debt Collection Licensing Act (DCLA). Routine HOA assessments are not considered consumer debt. Collection of assessments does not turn an HOA into an entity engaged in the business of debt collection. The Association is not a debt collector for the purposes of the Rosenthal Act&nbsp;because the definition of debt collector is premised upon the act of collecting consumer debt. In other words, because the Court finds that homeowner&rsquo;s assessments are not a consumer credit transaction for the purposes of the Rosenthal Act, it necessarily follows that the Association cannot be a debt collector under that statute, i.e., the Association does not in the ordinary course of business, regularly, on behalf of that person or others, engage in the collection of consumer debt. ( Dickson v. Century Park East ) ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login