URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/C/Condominiums-Defined

Condominiums Defined You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME C Condominiums Defined Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings CONDOMINIUM DEFINED Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Condos, PDs, Co-ops &amp; TICs Other Ownership Structures Escrows and Lenders Association Defined Common Interest Developments Condominiums Planned Developments Membership Rights Stock Cooperatives Tenancies&nbsp; in Common Davis-Stirling History Condominium Defined Condominium is Latin in origin and means co-ownership. A condominium is defined as &quot;an estate in real property, consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of real property coupled with a separate interest called a unit.&quot; ( Civ. Code &sect; 4125 ) Unless the declaration or condominium plan provide otherwise, if walls, floors, or ceilings are designated as boundaries of a separate interest, the interior surfaces of the perimeter walls, floors, ceilings, windows, doors, and outlets located within the separate interest are part of the separate interest and any other portions of the walls, floors, or ceilings are part of the common area. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4185(b) )&nbsp;Unlike stock cooperatives , condominium owners hold title to their units. Condo Unit Defined A condominium &quot;unit&quot; is typically a cube of air bounded by unfinished floors, ceilings, and perimeter walls. The boundaries of units and common areas are described in a condominium plan. Membership . Owners automatically become members of a nonprofit corporation or of an unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing the development. Any conveyance, whether voluntary or involuntary, of an owner&#39;s interest in the unit automatically includes the owner&#39;s membership in the association. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4630 ) Governance . Associations are governed by a board of directors elected by the membership. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7210 ) Forms of Condominium Developments Condominium developments are typically in one of four forms: (i) townhouse, (ii) stacked lowrise, (iii) stacked midrise, and (iv) stacked highrise. A fifth form, the airspace subdivision, is used for mobilehome parks. A condominium unit can also be filled with a combination of air and water and become a &quot;dockominium.&quot; 1. Townhouse Condominiums Townhouse condominiums are sometimes called patio homes and are side-by-side units that share a party wall. They do not have units above them or below. The number of side-by-side units can be as low as two or as many as a dozen or more. Townhouses are typically 2 or 3-story structures. The townhouse and the lot on which it rests are owned in common by all owners. The airspace inside the townhouse is owned separately by each unit owner. Parking is either in garages or carports. Management is usually offsite and budgets depend on the amenities and number of units. 2. Lowrise Condominiums These are stacked condominiums which are either two or three stories tall with or without elevators. Parking is either exposed lots or carports.&nbsp; For most, management is offsite. If the condominium complex is large with significant amenities, management could be onsite. Budgets will vary with the size of the complex and the number of amenities. 3. Midrise Condominiums Midrise condominium structures are four to eight stories tall with elevators. Parking is normally underground. Budgets are moderate and management is often offsite but could be onsite if the complex is large enough. 4. Highrise Condominiums Highrise condominium structures are nine + stories tall, with some as tall as 60 stories. Parking is underground. These are typically luxury buildings with large&nbsp; budgets and large staffs that include onsite management, housekeeping, maintenance, security personnel and valet. 5. Airspace Lots Another form of development is the airspace subdivision. This type of subdivision may refer to the lots as &quot;airspace condominiums,&quot; &quot;airspace lots,&quot; or &quot;condominium lots.&quot; In an airspace subdivision, the &quot;condominium lot&quot; is a cube of air defined by a survey and legal description of the lot. Everything within the survey stakes is the condominium lot or subdivision condominium. Accordingly, all structures and improvements within the boundaries of the lot are improvements to the condominium which are owned by the buyer of the condominium. It is not uncommon to see this type of ownership used for mobilehome developments , especially conversions from rental parks. Mobilehome condominiums where cubes of air with surveyed boundaries sit on lots in which owners park their mobilehomes. Mobilehome park conversions are allowed under California Government Code &sect; 66427.5 and can be structured as condominiums, stock cooperatives or planned developments. 6.&nbsp; Loft Condominiums Loft condominiums are&nbsp;also known as live/work projects are often located in areas of cities that are transitioning from industrial warehouse districts to mixed-use residential. They offer housing to people who want to live where they work.&nbsp;Loft condominiums are built into the industrial buildings. &quot;Loft-style&quot; may also refer to developments where a street-level business occupies the first floor and the residential loft occupies the second floor. 7. Hotel Condominiums These projects blend hotels and condos into a single package. Normally, at least some portion of the condo units are owned by private unit owners but are used by the hotel for hotel guests. The &quot;common area,&quot; owned by the condominium owners is managed by the hotel operator.&nbsp;Condo hotels are typically sold as second or third homes, not primary residences, so that units become part of the hotel&#39;s inventory of rentable units.&nbsp;The sale of hotel condominiums and subsequent rental management agreements do not constitute securities transactions. ( Salameh v. Tarsadia Hotel , 726 F.3d 1124 (9th Cir. Aug. 13, 2013) &nbsp; Condominium Hotel Condos Timeshare What you get Often two and three bedrooms, and always with a kitchen A hotel room, from standard to suite, often without kitchen facilities Ranges from studios to penthouses, usually with kitchenettes Length of Stay May occupy unit anytime, 365 days a year Generally, the length of stay is limited typically one week to three months Entitled to occupy during the share purchase done or two weeks, for example Ownership of unit Whole Whole Shared Annual fees wide variance $350 to $2,300 (usually includes utilities) $450 to $750 &nbsp; Renters Rentals may be restricted by homeowners association CC&amp;Rs Owners usually must make the unit available for rent when not occupying it by joining the developer&#39;s sponsored rental program, hiring an independent rental agent or renting the unit themselves Varies by management company &nbsp; 8. Dockominiums A dockominium is a marina-based version of a condominium. It consists of an undivided interest in the common elements of the marina coupled with a separate interest in a boat slip. The boat slip may consist of a cube of water extending to the land under the water plus the air above the water where the boat would be parked. Condominium boat slips can be bought and sold the same as condominiums. Members pay monthly fees that go to the maintenance and administration of the marina. 9. Horse Stalls Horse stall condominiums were proposed as early as 1988 by the Los Angeles Equestrian Center in Griffith Park. With 1,100 horse stalls, the plan was for people to buy stalls for $30,000 and then pay a $205 monthly maintenance fee. Maintenance Obligations . See &quot; Condominium Maintenance. &quot; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login