URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/C/Common-Area-Maintenance-and-Water-Damage

Common Area Maintenance and Water Damage You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME C Common Area Maintenance and Water Damage Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings MAINTENANCE DUTIES Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Maintenance Pest Control Plumbing Balcony Inspections Asbestos &amp; Mold Reserves Maintenance Duties Painting Asphalt Trees Sidewalks Parking&nbsp;Structures Maintenance &nbsp;District Roofs Maintenance Defined Generally, maintaining something means preserving it in its original condition to prolong its life.&nbsp;A fundamental duty of a board is to&nbsp;maintain and repair the common areas. Collecting sufficient assessments to carry out that duty is required by statute. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5600 ) Duty to Inspect and Investigate&nbsp; Duty to Inspect . In a 2019 case called &quot; Sands v. Walnut Gardens ,&quot; plaintiffs sued the association for a pipe on the roof that broke, causing water damage to their bedroom. The trial court granted a nonsuit in favor of the association. The appellate court reversed. The CC&amp;Rs required the association to keep the project in a &ldquo;first-class condition.&rdquo; Witnesses testified that the association failed to perform preventative maintenance and that the roof pipes had not been inspected or maintained in years. For proper maintenance of the common areas, associations must conduct regular inspections. There are three kinds of inspections: General&nbsp;Maintenance. &nbsp;Maintenance is&nbsp;usually conducted by a building engineer or vendor to check the condition of the common areas. It includes things such as&nbsp;lighting,&nbsp;landscaping,&nbsp;sidewalks,&nbsp;pools,&nbsp;pumps, and stairwells.&nbsp; Reserve Study . As part of its&nbsp; reserve&nbsp;study requirements , the Davis-Stirling Act requires all associations to conduct a&nbsp;diligent visual inspection&nbsp;of their major common area components every three years.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 5550(a) ) Elevated Structures .&nbsp;Beginning January 1, 2020, condominium associations with buildings with three or more units must i nspect elevated load-bearing structure s that are supported substantially by wood. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5551(l)) Building Envelope . This inspection focuses on water intrusion issues involving roofs, windows, and exterior walls. Duty to Investigate . Whenever boards learn of common area problems, such as cracked sidewalks, roof leaks, plumbing backups, etc., they must investigate them. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7231(a) ) They don&#39;t need to inspect them personally; they can rely on managing agents, plumbers, etc., to investigate and report back to the board. If an owner reports a flood inside his/her unit, the board must determine if the leak is originating from (i)&nbsp;the owner&#39;s plumbing, which is the owner&#39;s responsibility to repair, or (ii) the common area, which is the association&#39;s responsibility to repair. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4775 )&nbsp;The&nbsp; judicial deference &nbsp;doctrine will&nbsp;not shield an association from liability for ignoring problems; instead, it protects a board&rsquo;s good faith decisions to maintain and repair common areas. ( Affan v. Portofino Cove ) HOA Maintenance Duties Unless the governing documents of a common interest development state otherwise, associations must maintain, repair, and replace the association&#39;s common areas. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4775 ) The maintenance obligation includes maintaining the common areas in a reasonably safe condition. ( Ritter &amp; Ritter v. Churchill Condominium Ass&#39;n &nbsp;(2008) 166 Cal.App.4th 103, 119) Duty to Maintain . Maintaining property generally refers to keeping it in good condition or preserving its value. It can involve regular maintenance tasks like cleaning gutters, replacing air filters, repainting, and repairing leaks. It may be more expansive to include repairs, renovations, and replacing&nbsp;roofs, plumbing, electrical systems, etc. Property maintenance is important because it can help prevent small problems from becoming larger, more expensive ones. Duty to Repair . To &quot;repair&quot; something means to restore it to its original state when it has been damaged, broken, or malfunctioning. To repair something&nbsp;is to make it usable or functional again, rather than discarding it or replacing it entirely.&nbsp;A fundamental duty of a board is to&nbsp;maintain and repair the common areas regardless of who damaged them. For example, if a leak is an owner&#39;s responsibility and he/she refuses to repair it&nbsp;(such as a shower pan leak ), the board has three options: (i) initiate daily fines until the owner repairs the leak, (ii) repair the leak (if the board can get access) and then bill the owner for reimbursement , or (iii) go into court for an order that the owner either repair the leak or step aside and allow the association to repair it. The severity of the leak will determine the steps taken. When and how the damage is repaired may depend on whether the matter is turned over to insurance. Duty to Replace . Associations have a duty to replace common area elements when they can no longer be repaired. To that end, associations must conduct reserve studies and set aside monies for future replacement of roofs, elevators, plumbing systems, windows, etc.&nbsp;Associations must visually inspect the common areas every three years and prepare a list of&nbsp;all major components, the remaining useful life of those components, and the cost to repair or replace them. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5550 ) Regarding reserve studies, this does not mean that board members must personally inspect the common areas; they can hire an agent to inspect on their behalf. Duty to Use Licensed Vendors . Boards must use licensed and insured vendors to maintain and repair the common areas.&nbsp; Duty to Assess . Boards&nbsp; must &nbsp;levy assessments sufficient to fulfill their duty to maintain and repair the common areas. To fund large maintenance projects when reserves are insufficient, see Special Assessments . First-Class Maintenance Some CC&amp;Rs require the common areas to be kept in a &quot;first-class condition.&quot; This term is problematic.&nbsp;&quot;First-class&quot; can be subjective and legally vague. The requirement jeopardizes the association if it is sued over maintenance issues.&nbsp;When an association&#39;s CC&amp;Rs are amended, this term should be changed to a more defensible term, such as&nbsp;&quot;maintained in a safe and functional condition.&quot; This aligns with the board&rsquo;s fiduciary&nbsp;duties and community expectations without setting an unrealistically high or&nbsp;expensive standard of maintenance. It also aligns with reserve study timelines. Types of Maintenance Preventive (or Preventative) Maintenance .&nbsp;Preventive maintenance is routine&nbsp;and planned for. The cost of materials and labor are budgeted and expected. Regular or&nbsp;Common Maintenance . Examples of common preventive maintenance include (i)&nbsp;cleaning hallways, (ii)&nbsp;mowing lawns, (iii)&nbsp;treating pool chemicals, and (iv) lubricating gate and door hardware. Planned Maintenance . Planned maintenance is performed while equipment is still working to reduce the likelihood of failure. It extends the life of equipment and structures. It involves regular inspections and sometimes early replacement of components to ensure the smooth operation of the equipment. Examples include&nbsp;things such as&nbsp;(i)&nbsp;annual inspection of roofs and applying&nbsp;sealants as needed, (ii)&nbsp;cleaning roof gutters, (iii)&nbsp;caulking windows before leaks occur, (iv)&nbsp;changing filters, and (v)&nbsp;touching up paint. Corrective Maintenance .&nbsp;The main difference between corrective and preventive maintenance is that corrective maintenance is performed after a failure, while preventive maintenance is performed before a failure occurs.&nbsp;Corrective maintenance is reactive, while preventive maintenance is proactive. Scheduled Corrective Maintenance . Examples include (i) changing burned-out lightbulbs, (ii) replacing sidewalks buckled by tree roots, (iii) removing graffiti, (iv) repairing broken water lines, (v) repairing boilers, and (vi) repairing roof leaks. Emergency Corrective Maintenance .&nbsp;Emergency maintenance is unexpected. More often than not, it involves water damage from a burst pipe, unanticipated roof leaks, or a slope failure. Emergency maintenance may also require an&nbsp; emergency special assessment &nbsp;to fund the repairs.&nbsp; Deferred Maintenance .&nbsp;Postponing maintenance that needs to be done. Deferring needed maintenance can lead to premature failures, creating&nbsp;health and safety issues. Proper Delays. &nbsp;Planned short delays in maintenance to (i) raise funds for making repairs or (ii) stagger repairs for scheduling purposes are acceptable business practices. Even so, boards must protect members from any damage caused by such delays. Improper Deferrals. &nbsp;Deferring maintenance for the wrong reasons can be a breach of the board&#39;s&nbsp; fiduciary duties . Deferring maintenance to avoid spending money or raising dues is harmful to the membership because it (i) exposes the association to litigation and potential liability for damage caused by the deferrals, (ii) lowers property values, and (iii) increases the cost of the eventual repairs (which can result in substantial special assessments). In addition, it may expose directors to claims of gross negligence, breach of CC&amp;Rs, breach of statute ( Civ. Code &sect; 4775 ), and breach of fiduciary duties. Under those conditions, the&nbsp; business judgment rule &nbsp;will probably not protect the directors from personal liability. (See&nbsp; Champlain Towers ) HOA Maintenance Manuals To assist associations with the maintenance of common area components, boards should prepare a maintenance manual. Maintenance manuals&nbsp;address&nbsp;preventive maintenance issues by photographing and listing each component and providing information about when to inspect them and what&nbsp;work is suggested or required by Industry Standards or Product Manufacturers to extend the life of the item.&nbsp;It also provides consistency in the maintenance program from board to board and management company to management company. Some companies, such as&nbsp; ProTec Building Services , specialize in preparing association maintenance manuals. Following are sample manuals: Condominium Maintenance Manual Single Family Home Manual Highrise Maintenance Manual Exclusive Use Area Maintenance HOA Responsible for Plumbing . Association documents routinely assign maintenance duties between owners and the association. Unfortunately,&nbsp; exclusive use common areas &nbsp;are often left out or muddled regarding who is responsible for maintaining, repairing, and replacing them.&nbsp;In&nbsp; Dover Village v. Jennison , the court examined Civil Code &sect; 1364(a) (now&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 4775(a)), &nbsp;which states that owners are responsible for exclusive use common areas &quot; unless otherwise provided in the declaration .&quot; Because the statute defers to an association&#39;s CC&amp;Rs, the court turned to the Dover Village governing documents. It found that the CC&amp;Rs were silent as to maintenance duties involving exclusive use sewer lines. The CC&amp;Rs did, however, specifically designate patios and garages as exclusive use common areas to be maintained by owners. By expressly assigning maintenance duties for these exclusive use areas, the court concluded that all other exclusive use areas were the responsibility of the Association. Accordingly, the court found for Jennison and against Dover Village.&nbsp; Davis-Stirling Act . Governing documents throughout California were routinely drafted, making owners responsible for the &quot;maintenance&quot; of exclusive-use common areas without addressing repairs and replacement. Starting January 1, 2017,&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 4775(a)(3) &nbsp;makes associations responsible for repairing and replacing exclusive use common areas unless the governing document states otherwise. Homeowners continue to be responsible for maintaining their exclusive use areas. Unfortunately, the statute does not define what it means by &quot;maintain.&quot; Recommendation :&nbsp;To avoid legal disputes, associations need to clearly define an owner&#39;s maintenance duties for balconies, decks, patios, fences, roofs, plumbing, and other exclusive use common area items. Each association will need to decide whether it wants to maintain deck coatings or assign that task to owners--and if so, what does that mean? Associations should create&nbsp;maintenance charts&nbsp;with clearly defined duties. Those with existing charts will need to be updated to include more detail. Some associations will need to&nbsp; amend their CC&amp;Rs . Planned Developments Unless the CC&amp;Rs provide otherwise, associations are&nbsp;responsible for repairing, replacing, or maintaining the common areas. Owners are responsible for maintaining their separate interests and any exclusive use common areas&nbsp; appurtenant &nbsp;to their separate interests ( Civ. Code &sect; 4775(a) ), which means a separately owned lot, parcel, area, or space. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4185) &nbsp;&quot;Separate Interest&quot;.)&nbsp;In most&nbsp; planned developments , depending on the CC&amp;Rs, maintenance responsibilities are generally allocated as follows: Owner Entirely Responsible . In planned developments where the homes are single-family residences, owners are responsible for maintaining all aspects of their house and lot unless the CC&amp;Rs provide otherwise. Shared Responsibilities . In some documents, maintenance of the roofs and painting of the exteriors is assigned to the association. All other aspects of repairs and maintenance are assigned to the owner. This is especially true when the homes are constructed in &quot;pods&quot; or &quot;clusters&quot; with shared walls. When owners fail to maintain their property, the association can enforce maintenance standards as provided for in the&nbsp; governing documents . Condominium Maintenance Responsibilities In a condominium development, the definitions of separate interests, common areas, and exclusive-use common areas are especially important because maintenance responsibilities can vary for each of these areas.&nbsp;Unless CC&amp;Rs provide otherwise, the association is responsible for repairing, replacing, or maintaining the common area other than the exclusive use common area, and the owner of each separate interest is responsible for maintaining that separate interest and any exclusive use common area&nbsp; appurtenant &nbsp;to the separate interest. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4775(a) )&nbsp;Common Area is defined as the entire common interest development except for the separate interests in the development. ( Civ.&nbsp;Code &sect; 4095(a) )&nbsp;A condominium&#39;s &quot;separate interest&quot; is the air space bounded by the interior unfinished surfaces of the perimeter walls, floors, ceilings, windows, and doors. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4185(b) ) In interpreting deeds, the existing physical boundaries of a unit are conclusively presumed to be its boundaries rather than the metes and bounds expressed in the deed or condominium plan. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4220 ) Maintenance of Fixtures and Improvements Improvements . Everything inside that air space, including light fixtures, light switches and outlets, carpet, hardwood floors, paint and wallpaper, toilets, tubs, showers, sinks, appliances, cabinets, countertops, etc., is an improvement to the unit owned by the homeowner. Unless the governing document states otherwise, members are responsible for insuring, repairing, and replacing improvements in their units. Plumbing Fixtures . Plumbing fixtures are appliances generally located in the air space of a condominium that&nbsp;are improvements to and a part of the real property air space owned by a homeowner. Examples are toilets, faucets, sinks, tubs, and showers. Normally, all CC&amp;Rs assign maintenance duties for plumbing fixtures to the homeowner. Plumbing lines in the walls are not fixtures&mdash;they will either be common area or&nbsp; exclusive use &nbsp;common area lines. Electrical Fixtures . Like plumbing fixtures, electrical fixtures are improvements to the condominium air space owned by the unit owner. Unless the governing documents state otherwise, electrical fixtures are the duty of the homeowner to repair, maintain, and replace. Examples of electrical fixtures are light switches, outlets, bathroom ventilation fans, ceiling lights, ceiling fans, etc. Electrical lines in the walls are not fixtures&mdash;the wiring will either be common area or&nbsp; exclusive use &nbsp;common area, depending on its usage. Cabinets &amp; Counters . Cabinets and counters are real property improvements to the air space owned by the condominium unit owner. As such, it is the unit owner&#39;s duty to repair and maintain them. The homeowner&#39;s insurance generally covers the loss if the unit suffers water or fire damage. If the loss was caused by the negligence of a neighboring unit owner or the association, claims may be made against the negligent party. HVAC . Although heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) equipment are &quot;fixtures&quot; because they are attached to and improve real property, the equipment is often located outside the boundaries of a condominium&#39;s air space. The equipment is usually on the common area roof and deemed an &quot;exclusive use&quot; common area. The association&#39;s governing documents will determine the repair and maintenance of HVAC equipment and ducting. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login