URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/C/Contractor-Insurance

Contractor Insurance You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME C Contractor Insurance Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings CONTRACTOR INSURANCE Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links HOA Insurance Contractors, Owners &amp; Renters Fire Safety Homeowners &amp; Renters Contractors Contractor Insurance Required All contractors/vendors (plumbing, electrical, roofing, painting, street paving, landscaping, etc.)&nbsp;who work in or on the association&#39;s common areas must be licensed&nbsp;and insured.&nbsp; Workers Compensation . Workers&#39; compensation policies protect injured workers. &nbsp; Commercial General Liability (CGL) . CGL policies&nbsp;protect against lawsuits resulting from bodily injury or property damage arising from the contractor&#39;s work. The policy should include an endorsement naming the association &quot;Additional Insured,&quot; which provides additional protection to the association. However, such protections can be voided if the policy excludes coverage for multi-family developments (see &quot;Exclusions&quot; below). &nbsp; Completed Operations . This covers any damages that may arise after the work is completed. For example, if a new roof were to leak after it was finished and damage the common areas and an owner&#39;s unit, a claim can be tendered to the roofer&#39;s insurance company. &nbsp; Errors &amp; Omissions . Architects and engineers who prepare specifications for contractors or who consult with the association should carry E&amp;O professional liability insurance. E&amp;O&nbsp;insurance covers mistakes made by professionals. Condominium Exclusion . The most important item to look for when reviewing a vendor&#39;s insurance is whether it has a &quot;Multi-Family&quot; or &quot;Multi-Unit&quot; exclusion in the&nbsp;insurance policy. If they do, they are essentially UNINSURED if they perform any work for a condominium association. If that is the case, DO NOT hire the vendor.&nbsp;Because exclusions are typically not listed on the certificate of insurance given to the association, boards, and managers must request a complete copy of the contractor&rsquo;s CGL policy and have the association&#39;s insurance broker or attorney review it. Certificate of Insurance A &quot;Certificate of Insurance&quot; from an insurance company is a one-page document that provides evidence of insurance coverage. It contains the following information: The insured&#39;s name (who the carrier is insuring) The amount of insurance What is covered by the policy Names of any&nbsp;additionally insured&nbsp;parties Declarations Page . Unlike a certificate of insurance, a &quot;Declaration Page&quot; (below right) is part of the insurance policy. Like a Certificate, the &quot;DEC&quot; page outlines who is insured, what is insured, and the type of coverage. Unlike a certificate, it provides the policy term, how the claim will be paid, and the premiums charged. Exclusions . Neither page describes the&nbsp;exclusions. For example, if work for condominium associations is excluded, that would not appear on this one-page insurance summary. Accordingly, a list of all exclusions should be requested from the vendor&#39;s insurance agent. Annual Disclosure Requirement .&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 5300 &nbsp;requires associations to send, with the annual budget, a summary of the association&#39;s insurance.&nbsp; Section 5300(b)(9) allows an association to meet that obligation by sending the declaration page and not a certificate of insurance. The language states: For each policy, the summary shall include the name of the insurer, the type of insurance, the policy limit, and the amount of the deductible, if any. To the extent that any of the required information is specified in the insurance policy declaration page, the association may meet its obligation to disclose that information by making copies of that page and distributing it with the annual budget report. CAUTION : When you request proof of insurance from a vendor, ensure the information is sent directly from the insurance carrier. If it comes from the vendor and it is faxed or emailed&nbsp;only, vendors have been known to tamper with the declarations page by whitening out expiration dates and adding the association as &quot;additionally insured&quot; when, in fact, the coverage has already expired or the vendor is the only one insured.&nbsp; Additional Insured Endorsement &quot;Additional Insured&quot; means the association is added to and protected by another party&#39;s insurance policy (frequently a vendor hired by the association).&nbsp;Adding an additional insured to a vendor&#39;s policy is usually done as an endorsement on their policy. It makes the association a first-party claimant in the event the association is sued because of some act or omission by the contractor/vendor. In other words, the association can demand that the vendor&#39;s insurance carrier defend the association. The additional insured endorsements should include both: Ongoing Operations. This protects the association from claims made while the vendor is performing work. &nbsp; Completed Operations . This endorsement covers claims made after the work has been completed. The endorsement may be on the same form as ongoing operations or on a separate form. As an additional insured party, the association will receive notice if the policy is canceled or not renewed for any reason. Contractor Licensing See &quot; Contractor Licensing Requirements &quot; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login