URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/C/Candidate-Qualifications-Nominations-in-HOA-Elections

Candidate Qualifications & Nominations in HOA Elections You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME C Candidate Qualifications & Nominations in HOA Elections Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings CANDIDATE QUALIFICATIONS & NOMINATIONS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Director Elections Campaigning Director Term of Office Director&nbsp;Elections Acclamation Other Elections Recall&nbsp; Elections Annual, Special &amp; Town Hall&nbsp;Meetings Ballots&nbsp;&amp; Proxies Inspectors of Election &nbsp; Qualifications and Nominations Candidate&nbsp; Statements Quorum Voting Rights &amp; Cumulative Voting Election Rules QUALIFICATIONS TO SERVE ON THE BOARD Mandatory Qualification Beginning January 1, 2020, associations must disqualify persons from serving on the board if they are not members . ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(b) ) That means a spouse&nbsp;not on title cannot serve&nbsp;on the board.&nbsp;An unrecorded deed does not make a person a member or qualify them to serve on the board. People with &quot;pocket deeds&quot; (unrecorded deeds they carry in their pocket) do not qualify as members.&nbsp; Verifying Qualifications . Verifying a candidate&#39;s qualifications is not one of the&nbsp; duties of election inspectors . However, Inspectors are given the power to hear and determine all challenges regarding voting issues. If an owner were to challenge a candidate&#39;s eligibility, the Inspector could require the nominee to produce proof of ownership. Corporations and Companies . Entities such as corporations and companies can designate a non-member person to serve on the board.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(b)(2) ) To verify the authority of the designating party, boards can review a&nbsp;company&#39;s governing documents or the minutes of a corporation&#39;s board meeting designating their representative. For family trusts, the trustee on title to the property can serve on the board.&nbsp; Recommendation : Associations should amend their bylaws and election rules to limit entities that own multiple units from holding multiple seats on the board of directors. Permissive Qualifications Effective January 1, 2020, a&nbsp;person can be disqualified from serving on the board if the association changes its election rules to provide for one or more of the following: Delinquent. The person is delinquent in the payment of regular and special assessments unless (i) paid under protest , (ii) entered into a payment plan , or (iii) was not offered&nbsp; Internal Dispute Resolution (IDR) by the association. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(c)(1) &amp; (d) ) Joint Ownership . If the person, if elected, would be serving on the board at the same time as another person who holds a joint ownership interest in the same separate interest parcel as the person, and the other person is either properly nominated for the current election or an incumbent director. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(c)(2) ) Owner Less Than One Year. If that person has been a member of the association for less than one year. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(c)(3) ) Criminal Conviction . A past criminal conviction&nbsp;that either (i) prevents the association from purchasing the fidelity bond coverage required by Section 5806 should the person be elected or (ii) terminates the association&rsquo;s existing fidelity bond coverage as to that person should the person be elected. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(c)(4) ) Term Limits . &nbsp; Qualifications That Are No Longer Allowed . Following are some of the qualifications that are no longer allowed: The person must be in good standing .&nbsp; The person must not be in litigation with the association. A person suing the association can now serve on the board even though it creates conflicts of interest and confidentiality problems. The person has been convicted of a felony in the past ten years. Felons can serve on the board, provided&nbsp;the association&#39;s fidelity bond is not affected. The person is a second or third-tier registered sex offender . They cannot be excluded from the board unless it affects the fidelity bond. The person meets the minimum age and residency criteria. This affects senior&nbsp;communities. This means that an 18-year-old who owns a unit through inheritance can serve on 55+ boards. Qualifications Via Rule Change . Even though the bylaws may be silent on director qualifications or contain invalid qualifications, the court of appeals in Friars Village v. Hansing ruled that boards can adopt director qualifications in their election rules without amending their bylaws . This same authorization can be found in Civil Code &sect; 5105(c) . Verifying Qualifications Neither boards, management companies, nor Inspectors of Elections must&nbsp;verify candidate qualifications before mailing the ballots. However, if a candidate&#39;s qualifications have&nbsp;been challenged, the Inspector of Elections must investigate and decide whether a candidate is qualified. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5110(c) ) IDR Before Disqualification. Before disqualifying a nominee, the association must allow the person to participate in internal dispute resolution . ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(e) ) Unqualified Directors Once a director is no longer qualified to serve on the board, e.g., they cease to be an owner, the board can vacate the person&#39;s seat, and a new director is appointed to fill the seat (unless the bylaws require seats to&nbsp;be filled by vote of the membership). NOTE : There is a split in legal opinions on whether vacating the seat is required. Some believe it is legitimate for the director to complete his/her term on the board, but not be eligible thereafter to run for or be appointed to the board. NOMINATIONS Ways to Nominate Candidates Self-Nominations . Provided they meet&nbsp; director qualifications , members can nominate themselves for election to the board of directors. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(a)(3) ) &nbsp;The Davis-Stirling Act does not require that nominations be written. However, an association&#39;s governing documents or election rules may require it. If a name is placed into nomination by someone other than the candidate, the candidate should be contacted to verify their willingness to be on the ballot. Nominating Committees . Although most bylaws provide for nominating committees to screen people to serve on boards, such committees were made moot by&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 5105(a)(3) . Nominating committees can still be appointed by boards and can still solicit candidates, but they can no longer reject qualified candidates.&nbsp;Nominating committees and boards can promote the candidates they select. However, they must do so at their own expense. They cannot advocate for or against candidates in the ballot materials. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5135 ) Floor Nominations . Nominations from the floor are not required by the Davis-Stirling Act, but may be used if provided for in the election rules. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(f) ) They can also be dispensed with in&nbsp; elections by acclamation . Procedure for Nominations . Once a quorum has been established, the chair of the meeting will, at the appropriate point on the agenda, open the floor for nominations. Members in good standing may nominate any qualified individual as a candidate for election to the board. A member need not be recognized by the chair to make a nomination, and no second is required.&nbsp; Members may nominate themselves or nominate others. There is a limit on the number of nominations any one individual can make. ( RONR (12th ed.) 46:6 ) Ballots Already Cast . &nbsp;If owners have already mailed in their ballots, they are precluded from voting for floor nominees since their ballots are irrevocable once they are cast. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5120(a) ) Eliminate Floor Nominations . &nbsp;If an association&#39;s bylaws or election rules allow for floor nominations, it forces a full election, even if the election is&nbsp; uncontested . To avoid unnecessary election expenses, bylaws and&nbsp; election rules &nbsp;should be amended to drop any requirement for floor nominations. Write-In Candidates . The Davis-Stirling Act states that associations can adopt election rules that permit nominations from the floor and write-in candidates. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(f) ) By implication, unless an association&#39;s&nbsp;bylaws or election rules provide for write-in candidates, they are not allowed. If that is the case, members cannot write in candidates on their ballots. If they do, the inspector of elections can deem votes for write-in candidates invalid. Any votes on the ballot for announced candidates would still be valid. Verification . If write-ins are allowed, the nomination need not take place in advance to be valid. Even so, the write-in candidate will need to be contacted to verify he/she is willing to accept the nomination (in the event a sufficient number of votes are cast to elect the write-in candidate). Eliminate Write-Ins : Associations should amend their&nbsp; election rules &nbsp;to make clear whether write-in candidates are allowed during elections. If they are allowed, blank lines should be added to the ballot. If they are not allowed, the restriction should be stated on the ballot as well as in the election rules. If there is any uncertainty about whether write-in candidates are allowed, the board should seek a legal opinion on how best to proceed. Notice of Candidates .&nbsp; Civil Code&nbsp;&sect; 5115(b)(3) &nbsp;requires 30 days&#39; notice to the membership of all candidates that will appear on the ballot. Obviously, this requirement does not apply to write-in candidates since they will not be added to the ballot by individual owners during the balloting process.&nbsp; Close of Nominations If the governing documents do not establish a cutoff for nominations, the board may establish a reasonable date before the mailing of ballots for closing nominations. If the association&#39;s governing documents require nominations from the floor, nominations may be closed by the board for the purpose of preparing and mailing ballots and then reopened at the annual meeting so additional candidates can be added to the ballot. Obviously, members who have already voted will not know about the nominations. Also,&nbsp;this requirement does not apply to write-in candidates since they will not be added to the ballot by individual owners during the balloting process.&nbsp; Review for Accuracy . At least&nbsp; 30 days &nbsp;before the ballots are distributed, the association must prepare a list of the candidates and make it available to the candidates so they can verify the accuracy of their information&nbsp;on the list. The inspector of elections must then change and correct lists within&nbsp; two (2) business days&nbsp; of any error or omission being reported. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(a)(7) ) Excluding Candidates All nominees, provided they meet the qualifications to serve on the board and submitted their names before the close of nominations, must be placed on the ballot mailed to the membership, i.e.,&nbsp; written ballots &nbsp;must specify a choice between approval and disapproval of each matter (or candidate) known at the time the ballot is distributed. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7514(a) ) Boards should not use&nbsp;small technical violations in the nomination process to exclude qualified candidates from running for the board. For example, associations should not exclude a qualified candidate for submitting a photocopy of a candidate&#39;s application rather than an original. Examples of substantive violations are (i)&nbsp;missing the deadline for submitting their nomination, and (ii)&nbsp;failing to meet&nbsp;director qualifications. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login