URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/D/Displaying-Flags

Displaying Flags You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME D Displaying Flags Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings DISPLAYING AMERICAN AND FOREIGN FLAGS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Rules &amp; Regulations Renters Pets Daycare, Drones, Flags Vehicles Clubhouse, Gym, Pool Nuisance Issues Clotheslines, Gardens, Turf &nbsp; Daycare &amp; Sober Living Homes Drones Flags Satellite&nbsp; Dishes Yard Sales Nudity Laws Allowing the American Flag Federal Law . On July 24, 2006, House Resolution 42, the Freedom to Display the American Flag Act, was signed into law. The Federal Flag Code, 4 U.S.C Sections 5-10, as amended, states &ldquo;A condominium association, cooperative association, or residential real estate management association may not adopt or enforce any policy, or enter into any agreement, that would restrict or prevent a member of the association from displaying the flag of the United States on residential property within the association with respect to which such member has a separate ownership interest or a right to exclusive possession or use.&rdquo; California Law. California&#39;s Civil Code &sect; 4705 adopted in 2002, allows owners to display the United States flag on their separate property or exclusive use common area, regardless of any association restrictions to the contrary, except as required for the protection of public health or safety. Reasonable Rules Regarding Flags Associations can to adopt reasonable rules and regulations concerning the time, location, materials, size, number, and manner where flags and signs can be displayed. The U.S. flag may be displayed: in a window of a separate interest from a staff or pole on owner&#39;s balconies, patios, decks,&nbsp;private yards, or other locations on a separate interest or exclusive use common area Regulating Materials . California law only applies to U.S. flags made of fabric, cloth or paper. Associations may prohibit U.S. flags or depictions of the flag made from lights, paint, roofing, siding, paving materials, flora, or balloons, or any other similar material. ( Civ.&nbsp;Code &sect; 4705(b) ; Civ. Code &sect; 4710(b) ) Flag Poles .&nbsp;Associations can limit the size, color and construction of poles. However, the restrictions must be reasonable. Worn and Tattered Flags . Associations can ask an owner to replace a flag that is faded or tattered.&nbsp;However, to enforce compliance, associations should adopt&nbsp;flag rules. Advertising . Associations can prohibit the display of the US flag for advertising purposes. ( Civ.&nbsp;Code &sect; 4710 ) Foreign Flags . Because of the broad language in Civil Code &sect; 4710 , associations cannot prohibit the display of flags of other countries.&nbsp;Associations can, however, limit the number of flags, whether American or otherwise, to one. Sample Flag Rules Following are some issues associations may wish to consider when adopting rules: A U.S. flag consists of 13 equal horizontal stripes of red (top and bottom) alternating with white; there is a blue rectangle in the upper hoist-side corner bearing 50 small, white, five-pointed stars arranged in nine offset horizontal rows of six stars (top and bottom) alternating with rows of five stars. Only one flag, whether American or otherwise,&nbsp;may be flown per household. Flags [in condominium projects] may be displayed on balconies in the following manner... Flag poles [in planned developments] are limited to the following height, materials and locations... Flags may only be flown between sunrise and sunset [If houses are close to each other, this will eliminate flapping noise that might disturb neighbors.] Flags may only be constructed of the following materials: nylon, polyester, cotton or similar materials. Flags constructed of lights, paint, balloons or other materials are prohibited. Flags are limited to the following dimensions... [establish acceptable sizes such as 2&#39;x3&#39;, 4&#39;x6&#39;, etc.] Flags may not be flown upside down. Flags may only be flown at half staff for Federal, State, or Association recognized memorials authorizing flags to be flown at half staff. These generally include by order of the (i) President upon the death of a principal figure of the United States Government, (ii) the Governor of California upon the death of a past or present official of California, or (iii) the Board of Directors upon the death of past or present member of the Board. Flags must be cleaned and mended as needed. Flags may not be displayed in such a manner as to permit them to be easily torn, soiled, or damaged in any way. Flag should not be displayed during inclement weather unless an all-weather flag is used. Miscellaneous Raising and Lowering the Flag .&nbsp; The flag should be raised briskly and lowered slowly and ceremoniously. When the flag is lowered, no part of it should touch the ground or any other object; it should be received by waiting hands and arms. To store the flag it should be folded neatly and ceremoniously. How to Fold the Flag .&nbsp; Flags, when not in use, should be folded into a&nbsp; triangle shape . Fold the flag in half width-wise twice. Fold up a triangle, starting at the striped end ... and repeat ... until only the end of the union is exposed. Then fold down the square into a triangle and tuck inside the folds. A properly proportioned flag will fold 13 times on the triangles, representing the 13 Original Colonies.&nbsp;When finally complete the triangular folded flag is emblematical of the tri-corner hat worn by the Patriots of the American Revolution.&nbsp;When folded no red or white stripe is to be evident leaving only the honor field of blue and stars. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login