URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/D/Director-Ethics-Conflicts-of-Interest-Recusal

Director Ethics, Conflicts of Interest & Recusal You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME D Director Ethics, Conflicts of Interest & Recusal Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings HOA DIRECTOR ETHICS, CONFLICTS OF INTEREST & RECUSAL Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Boards of Directors Board Meetings Committees Management Board&nbsp;Authority &amp; Duties Fiduciary&nbsp;Duties Ethics Censure Provisional&nbsp; Directors Director&nbsp;Resignations Director Appointments Officers &nbsp; Conflicts of Interest &quot;Interested Director&quot; Defined An &quot;interested director&quot; is one who has an interest in the outcome of a board decision because he/she receives a personal benefit from the decision that is different from the benefit conferred on other members of the association. This creates a conflict of interest for the director, which has the potential to influence his/her vote as a board member. Decisions influenced by personal interests rather than the association&#39;s interests can lead to a breach of the director&#39;s fiduciary duties .&nbsp;The Davis-Stirling Act clearly defines actions the Legislature&nbsp;considers conflicts of interest. As provided for in&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 5350(b) , a&nbsp;director or member of a committee may not vote on any of the following matters: Disciplinary action against them. An assessment for damage to the common areas. A request for a payment plan for overdue assessments. A decision on whether to foreclose on a lien on their property. Review of a proposed physical change to their separate interest. A grant of exclusive use common area to the director or committee member.&nbsp; Lose Protections . When a director acts in his/her interests instead of the association&#39;s, the director loses the protections of the Business Judgment Rule : &quot;An exception to the presumption afforded by the business judgment rule ... is that it does not shield actions taken without reasonable inquiry, with improper motives, or as a result of a conflict of interest.&quot; ( Berg &amp; Berg Enterprises, LLC v. Boyle (2009) 178 Cal.App.4th 1020, 1045-1046)&nbsp;Regardless of whether he has a material financial interest, a director &ldquo;may not make decisions for the association that benefit their own interests at the expense of the association and its members.&rdquo; ( Raven&#39;s Cove Townhomes, Inc. v. Knuppe Dev&#39;l Co . (1981) 114 Cal.App.3d 783) A director who breaches the basic fiduciary duties are liable to the Association. (Id.) Where a director finds himself in a position to vote on a matter in which he has a personal interest, he should be recused. Full Disclosure of Conflicts of Interest An example of a conflict of interest is a potential contract between an association and a director&nbsp;or between the association and any other entity in which a director has a material financial interest. When a director has a conflict of interest, potential liability can be avoided if: Full Disclosure . The interested director fully discloses the conflict. No Influence on Vote. The interested director leaves the room so the remaining directors can discuss the issue fully and freely and vote without the interested director. J ust &amp; Reasonable. Even if the director makes full disclosure and avoids influencing the vote, the transaction must be fair and reasonable to the association at the time it is authorized, approved, or ratified. ( Corp. Code &sect; 310 ;&nbsp; Corp. Code &sect; 5233 ;&nbsp; Corp. Code &sect; 7233 ) Burden Shifts . If the interested director makes full disclosures and recuses him/herself, and if a disinterested majority of directors approves the proposal of the interested director, the burden of proof shifts to the person challenging the transaction. ( Harvey v. The Landing HOA ) Problems . Even when a director recuses himself, associations should avoid contracting with companies where a director has a financial interest. Such arrangements are fraught with peril both politically and legally. Political Problems. At election time, owners may accuse the board member of reaping secret profits, taking advantage of his or her position on the board, doing shoddy work, etc., and demand his/her ouster. Legal Problems. If the work by the interested director&#39;s company is defective, the board faces the unpleasant prospect of making legal demands on a fellow board member. At the same time, they face political problems with the membership for having given the fellow director the contract in the first place. Interested Director &amp; Quorum Interested directors may be counted in determining the presence of a quorum at a board or committee&nbsp;meeting that authorizes, approves, or ratifies a contract or transaction. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7234 ) However, directors must recuse themselves from discussion and voting on issues in which they have a direct personal or pecuniary interest not common to other board members. ( RONR (12th ed.) 45:4 ) [N]o person can, at one and the same time, faithfully serve two masters representing diverse or inconsistent interests with respect to the service to be performed. The principle has always been one of the essential attributes of every rational system of positive law, even reaching to private contractual transactions, whereby there are created between individuals trust or fiduciary relations. ( Stockton Plumbing &amp; Supply Co. v. Wheeler (1924) 68 Cal. App. 592, 601-2) Adversarial Director - Legal Advice A director who is adversarial to the board and likely to bring litigation against the association is not entitled to receive legal advice from the association&rsquo;s counsel or attend executive session meetings where the matter is discussed.&nbsp;Although there is no California statute or case directly on point, the issue was decided in a 2015 case by the Washington Court of Appeals. The Court decided that an adversarial director likely to sue the association was required to&nbsp;recuse himself&nbsp;from meetings where the board would discuss potential litigation involving the director. ( Hartstene Pointe Maintenance Association v. Diehl ,&nbsp; No. 45739-3-II (Wash. June 23, 2015))&nbsp;Case law from another state is not binding in California, but the principles described in the case would likely produce the same result in a California court. This same principle applies to directors who breach&nbsp; confidential information &nbsp;or waive&nbsp; attorney-client privilege . Not a Conflict of Interest Oftentimes board members vote on matters that result in a benefit to them that is not a conflict of interest because the matter also benefits the membership as a whole. For example, if a board member votes to add security patrols to the development, there is no conflict of interest since the benefit he receives from the patrol is the same benefit received by all members of the association. ( RONR (12th ed.) 47:10 )&nbsp;Directors are allowed to vote for themselves for an office. ( RONR (12th ed.) 45:5 )&nbsp;A director subject to a censure is not required to recuse him/herself from the discussion or vote. See &quot; Censuring Directors .&quot;&nbsp; Recused From Discussion and Decision &quot;Recusal&quot; or to &quot;recuse&quot; oneself means to remove oneself from participation in a decision where you have a conflict of interest. No member should vote on a question in which he has a direct personal or pecuniary interest not common to other members of the organization. For example, if a motion proposes that the organization enter into a contract with a commercial firm of which a member of the organization is an officer and from which contract he would derive personal pecuniary profit, the member should abstain from voting on the motion. ( RONR (12th ed.) 45:4 ) Recusal normally occurs when a director has a&nbsp; conflict of interest &nbsp;or prejudice concerning a particular matter. A conflict of interest is any situation in which financial or other personal considerations may unduly influence the director&#39;s judgment. This includes matters such as a disciplinary action against the director for violating the CC&amp;Rs or voting on a potential contract with a company owned by a close relative of the director. Leave the Room During Recusal . In each case, the director has a personal interest in the outcome of the vote--an interest not shared by other directors. In such instances, the interested director should leave the meeting room so the remaining directors can freely discuss and vote on the issue. (California&#39;s&nbsp; Fair Political Practices Act , Calif. Code of Reg. &sect; 18702.5) Once the vote is taken, the recused director may return to the meeting. If the interested director were to stay in the meeting, his presence could inhibit the board&#39;s discussion and influence the vote. To avoid liability, a conflicted director must remove himself from the process of conferring and voting on matters in which he has a personal interest. the disqualified member&#39;s mere presence, or knowledge thereafter, might also subtly influence the decisions of other council members who must maintain an ongoing relationship with him. ... The attorney, as well as the other council members, might not feel as free to disclose everything necessary when a &quot;biased&quot; public official were present. The council members and attorney might feel similarly inhibited where they are aware that a &quot;biased&quot; council member can later obtain a tape recording of the attorney-council discussion. The town might thus be denied effective assistance of counsel. ( Hamilton v. Los Gatos ) Interested Director Refuses to Leave the Room .&nbsp; If the interested director does not leave voluntarily, the board can ask him to leave. If he refuses to leave, the board can adjourn the meeting to another location where they can hold the discussion and vote without interference by the interested director. Under those circumstances, the board might also consider a&nbsp; vote of censure &nbsp;against the director for his refusal to recuse himself. Gifts, Dinners, and Compensation Vendor Gifts . It is not illegal for an association vendor, such as a landscaper or even law firms, to give board members nominal gifts over the holidays. They are given as a token of appreciation for their business relationship. Tickets to a baseball game, a fruit basket, a bottle of wine, or dinner at a restaurant, are examples of acceptable gifts. Gift-giving becomes a problem if the gift is significant enough that it influences a director&#39;s judgment. Giving board members cash or trips to Hawaii are examples of problem gifts. If directors approve contracts based on the gifts they receive, the gifts become bribes. That&#39;s why most organizations adopt ethics rules setting strict limits on gifts. (See&nbsp; House Ethics Manual &nbsp;for the U.S. Congress concerning gifts.) Retirement Gifts . Some boards give retiring directors plaque or a gift certificate. The gift is a small thank you to volunteer directors who put in a great deal of time and effort for their community. Such recognition does not require the approval of the membership. Board approval is sufficient.&nbsp;Some of the associations we represent give retiring directors plaques that cost $50 to $200. Some give outgoing directors gift certificates as well. There is nothing wrong with modest gift certificates. The larger the gift certificate, the more likely it will raise eyebrows among members.&nbsp; Dinners . Some associations pay&nbsp;for the lunch when directors. Feeding them does not make them paid directors. When directors miss meals to attend board meetings they get cranky. When their stomachs are rumbling, their blood sugar is low and they are looking at their watches, board members cannot give proper attention to the business at hand. When directors are fed, their patience seems to improve and they make better decisions. Industry Practice . &nbsp;Some boards have popcorn and M&amp;Ms at their meetings, others order veggie platters, still others have pizza or Subway sandwiches. As long as the cost is modest, the practice is more than reasonable and directors do not lose their volunteer status nor does it raise any ethical issues. No Compensation . Directors cannot be paid for their service on the Board.&nbsp;( Corp. Code &sect; 5047.5(a) ) They are volunteers, not paid professional directors.&nbsp; Expense Reimbursement . &nbsp;Payment of per diem, mileage, or other reimbursement expenses to a director or executive officer does not affect that person&#39;s status as a volunteer. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7231.5(b) ,&nbsp; Civ. Code &sect; 5800(b) ) For example, if a director buys light bulbs for the common areas using his own money, the association can reimburse him without impacting his volunteer status. Directors should ALWAYS produce a receipt for those items for which they are seeking reimbursement. Miscellaneous &nbsp; Managers . As with board members, managing agents must also disclose conflicts of interest. See Manager Conflicts of Interest. Ethics Policy : To avoid problems, boards should adopt and carefully follow an ethics policy. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login