URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/D/Declarant-Developer-Transition

Declarant-Developer Transition You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME D Declarant-Developer Transition Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings DEVELOPER ISSUES Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Contractor Issues Developer Issues Developer&nbsp;Transition Transfer&nbsp;of Records Annexations Condo Conversions Construction&nbsp;Defects Funding Defect Litigation SB 800 Repairs Settlement Disclosure Declarant Defined The &quot;Declarant&quot; is the person or entity that creates the original governing documents for the association. The Declarant is generally the developer of the project and usually reserves certain rights and powers to himself related to the sale of units in the project, extra voting rights, etc. The Davis-Stirling Act defines the Declarant as follows: &ldquo;Declarant&rdquo; means the person or group of persons designated in the declaration as declarant, or if no declarant is designated, the person or group of persons who sign the original declaration or who succeed to special rights, preferences, or privileges designated in the declaration as belonging to the signator of the original declaration. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4130 ) Most associations eventually restate their CC&amp;Rs &nbsp;to eliminate all references to the Declarant, eliminate all legalese, and add pertinent provisions from the Davis-Stirling Act. Developer Assessments Start of Payments . &nbsp;When the Declarant starts paying assessments, it is normally found in the CC&amp;Rs. In smaller, single-phase projects, assessments typically commence on the first day of the first month following the first close of escrow in the project. Larger projects are usually divided into smaller portions called phases. Assessments on all separate interests commence on a phase-by-phase basis and start on the first day of the first month following the first close of escrow in each phase. Rental Community . &nbsp;Sometimes, the developer may keep a portion of a project and operate it as a rental community. The developer may not have to pay assessments if the rental community is separate from the common interest development. If the rental units are a part of the common interest development, then the CC&amp;Rs may require the developer to start paying assessments when the units are first rented. Services for Assessments . &nbsp;Also, particularly in large master-planned communities, the developer may provide maintenance services in exchange for reduced assessments. Developer Voting Rights For a period of time, the developer of an association will have greater voting power, which is defined as Class B membership . It gives the developer three votes for each unit/lot&nbsp;held by the developer. Alternative Dispute Resolution On August 16,&nbsp;2012, developers&nbsp;won&nbsp;a significant victory in&nbsp;the&nbsp; Pinnacle Museum Tower&nbsp; case. The California Supreme Court reversed direction from prior decisions. It held that homeowner associations are bound by arbitration provisions in their CC&amp;Rs, even though those provisions were written and recorded by the developers. The Pinnacle decision eliminates the right by associations to go to court for a trial before a judge and a jury. The expected benefit to developers is the elimination&nbsp;of&nbsp;large jury verdicts by removing juries from the process. Historically, monetary awards by judges and arbitrators are smaller than those given by juries. As a result of the&nbsp; Pinnacle&nbsp; decision, developers may offer smaller settlements for construction defects. If their offers are rejected, HOAs will be forced to prove their cases in binding arbitration. Even so, the arbitration process is streamlined and less expensive than litigation and could produce good results if the association can prove its case to the arbitrator. Recommendation : If a development is less than ten years old,&nbsp;various statutes of limitations run on any defect claims the association may have. To avoid losing rights, boards should contact legal counsel to determine their best course of action. To read the entire case, see&nbsp; Pinnacle Museum Tower v. Pinnacle Market Development . Developer Transition At the outset, the developer has most of the votes, controls the board, and appoints the architectural committee. However, the California Department of Real Estate (&quot;DRE&quot;) requires that developers gradually give up control in each area. Voting Structure .&nbsp; Developers retain control by creating a two-class voting structure. Class A is usually the homeowners, each of whom gets one vote for each lot or condominium owned. Class B is usually the developer. The developer has three votes for each lot or condominium he owns. In a single-phase project, Class B converts to Class A when either the total number of Class A votes equals the total number of Class B votes or on the second anniversary of the conveyance of the first lot or condominium in the project, whichever occurs first. In a multi-phase project, Class B converts to Class A either on the second anniversary of the first conveyance in the most recent phases or four years after the first conveyance in the project, whichever occurs first. Even when the developer has voting control, the DRE requires approval by a majority of both Class A and Class B for certain votes, such as amendments to governing documents, effectively giving homeowners a veto on some issues. Director Elections .&nbsp; Beginning with the first election, a procedure must be established that ensures at least 20% of the directors are elected solely by homeowner votes. Once the homeowners elect a director, only the homeowners can remove the director. Eventually, as the homeowners get more votes and Class B converts to Class A, the homeowners will elect all of the directors. The timing will vary from project to project depending on the pace of sales and number of phases in the project. Architectural Committee/Design Review Committee . &nbsp;The developer has the right to appoint all of the committee members until one year after the first (or only) final subdivision public report for the project. After that, the board must have the right to appoint at least one committee member until either the close of escrow for 90% of the lots and condominiums in the project or five years after the first final subdivision public report was issued, whichever occurs first. After that, the board has the right to appoint all committee members. Caveat : The DRE may approve alternate arrangements and the DRE&#39;s rules have changed over time. To determine when control is turned over for your association, you must read the&nbsp; articles of incorporation ,&nbsp; bylaws , and&nbsp; CC&amp;Rs . Also, the DRE&#39;s rules for master-planned communities (usually 500 or more homes) differ from those for smaller subdivisions. In general, developers are allowed to control master-planned communities for a much longer time. Fiduciary Duties .&nbsp; Even when the developer controls the board of directors, he cannot use his power to his benefit at the association&#39;s expense. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7231 ,&nbsp; Raven&#39;s Cove v. Knuppe Development &nbsp;(1981) 114 Cal.App.3d 783) Transfer of Records Before the developer leaves the development, there should be a complete transfer of records to the association .&nbsp;&nbsp; Successor in Interest A &ldquo;successor in interest&rdquo; to the developer is a person or company that&nbsp;has acquired property and rights previously held by the original developer.&nbsp;Unless CC&amp;Rs state otherwise, an association is not the successor in interest to the developer. Instead, it is a separate entity with entirely different obligations, duties, and goals that continue to exist even when the developer ceases to. Associations generally do not need the developer&#39;s powers--it has its own powers via the CC&amp;Rs, bylaws, Davis-Stirling Act, and Corporations Code. Removing Declarant/Developer Provisions from CC&amp;Rs Declarant language can be very confusing to directors and members alike. Is the association a successor to the declarant? Does the association have the powers of the declarant? Is the association allowed to modify or delete declarant language? The association is not a successor to the developer and does not have a declarant&#39;s powers unless specifically assigned to the association. Associations can delete declarant provisions once the declarant has completed construction of the development, has terminated construction activities, and has terminated his or her marketing activities for the sale, lease, or other disposition of separate interests within the development. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4230 ) ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login