URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/D/Dissolving-an-Association

Dissolving an Association You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME D Dissolving an Association Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings DISSOLVING AN ASSOCIATION Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links The Legislature...finds that covenants and restrictions contained in the declaration, are an appropriate method for protecting the common plan of developments and to provide for a mechanism for financial support for the upkeep of common area including, but not limited to, roofs, roads, heating systems, and recreational facilities. If declarations terminate prematurely, common interest developments may deteriorate and the housing supply of affordable units could be impacted adversely. ( Civ. Code &sect; 1265(a) .) Required Approvals for Dissolution Dissolving an association is extremely difficult since its purpose is to maintain and manage common areas . Dissolution, therefore, requires approvals on multiple levels. Board Approval . The board of directors must adopt a resolution to dissolve the corporation. If less than a quorum, the resolution must be unanimous. It would be necessary to elect or appoint directors to the board so that this resolution can be adopted. ( Corp. Code &sect;&sect; 7911(a)(1) and 8610(c) .) Membership Approval . As provided for in Corporations Code &sect; 8724 , any owners association for a planned development, condominium, stock cooperative or community apartment project of five or more units that is responsible for managing, maintaining, preserving or controlling any lot, unit or other area cannot be dissolved unless 100% of the members consent. Governmental Approval . The governing documents of many associations also require the approval of local governmental entities before an association can be dissolved. Lender Approval. The governing documents of most associations also require the approval of first trust deed holders. Process Considerations If all necessary approvals could theoretically be obtained, directors need to include the following process considerations: An accountant knowledgeable about associations will need to provide advice about the tax consequences of the dissolution. It will be necessary to give formal notice of the dissolution to the IRS. Corporate assets will need to be sold, and can be sold without a vote of the membership. (Corp. Code &sect; 8710(g).) All of the debts and liabilities of the association will need to be paid. (Corp. Code &sect;&sect; 8713-8714.) Creditors of the association must receive notice of the dissolution. (Corp. Code &sect; 8618.) A receiver can be appointed by the court to assist the dissolution. (Code Civ. Proc. &sect;&sect; 566-567 and Corp. Code &sect; 8513.) Maintenance Considerations As a practical matter, it may be impossible to dissolve an association if no entity can be found to take over their maintenance responsibilities. The following issues must be resolved: Who will control the common area? How will the buildings be maintained, repaired, painted and re-roofed without assessment funding and contracts issued through the association? Will lenders fund loans to purchasers and refinance loans if there is no association? Will more litigation ensue if neighbors enforce the CC&amp;Rs rather than the association? If an unincorporated association is set up to replace the former corporation, won&#39;t the same costs of operation and problems of apathy and dissension exist? One association that attempted dissolution received a negative response from the County . Of interest is the letter&#39;s paragraph on taxes. Apointing a Receiver &nbsp; An alternative to dissolution is the appointment of a receiver by the superior court. ( Code Civ. Proc. &sect; 564 .) The receiver would need to be paid from assessments and may have the power to increase assessments without a vote of the membership. In addition to the fees and costs of the receiver, the association would incur the expense of accounting and legal fees incurred by the receiver. These charges could be substantial. Involuntary Corporate Dissolution Effective January 1, 2016 corporations are subject to administrative dissolution if they have been suspended by the Franchise Tax Board or the Secretary of State for at least 48 months. This is NOT the same as dissolving the association. If corporate dissolution occurs, the association continues to exist as an unincorporated entity. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with issues affecting community associations, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login