URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/D/Day-Care-Group-Care-Sober-Living-Homes

Day Care, Group Care & Sober Living Homes You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME D Day Care, Group Care & Sober Living Homes Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings DAY CARE, GROUP CARE & SOBER LIVING HOMES Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Rules &amp; Regulations Renters Pets Daycare, Drones, Flags Vehicles Clubhouse, Gym, Pool Nuisance Issues Clotheslines, Gardens, Turf &nbsp; Daycare &amp; Sober Living Homes Drones Flags Satellite&nbsp; Dishes Yard Sales Nudity Day Care Homes The California legislature wants family daycare homes for children to be situated in normal residential surroundings to give children the same home environment as in a traditional home setting. ( Health &amp; Safety Code &sect; 1597.40(a) ) To that end, the legislature declared that qualifying day care operations as &quot;residential, single-family homes&quot; ( H&amp;S Code &sect; 1597.40(a)) and voided restrictions that directly or indirectly limit the acquisition, use, or occupancy of property for a family day care home for children. ( H&amp;S Code &sect; 1597.40(c) )&nbsp;&nbsp;A &quot;daycare home&quot; regularly provides care, protection, and supervision for up to 14 children for periods of less than 24 hours per day. ( H&amp;S Code &sect; 1596.78(a) ) See subsection (d): A small-family daycare home or large-family daycare home includes a detached single-family dwelling, a townhouse, a dwelling unit within a dwelling, or a dwelling unit within a covered multifamily dwelling in which the underlying zoning allows for residential uses. A small family daycare home or large family daycare home is where the daycare provider resides, and includes a dwelling or a dwelling unit that is rented, leased, or owned.&nbsp; (emphasis added). &nbsp; Reasonable Regulations . Effective January 1, 2020, associations cannot restrict daycare homes directly or indirectly. However, they may adopt reasonable regulations&nbsp;that include: Licensing . The homeowner or tenant operator must obtain proper licensing &nbsp;and any other licensing that may be required. Different conditions and requirements regarding state and local licensing are imposed by California law for small-family and large-family day care homes. ( H&amp;S Code &sect;&sect; 1597.44-46 ; &sect; 1597.465 ) )Associations can check the validity and type of license with the local Community Care Licensing Division Child Care Office. Local &amp; State Laws . Daycare operators must comply with all local and state laws regulating the licensing and operations of a daycare center.&nbsp; Insurance or Affidavits . Operators must maintain (1) liability insurance for at least $100,000 per occurrence and $300,000 aggregate, or a bond in the aggregate amount of $300,000, or (2) affidavits signed by each parent with a child enrolled in the center that states that the parent knows that the daycare center does not carry insurance or a bond. If there is insurance or a bond, the association may require that it be named as an additional insured, provided that the association pays any additional premium assessed for this coverage. ( H&amp;S Code &sect; 1597.531 ) Indemnification . An association may require daycare operators to indemnify, defend, and hold the association harmless for any liability arising out of the daycare facility&#39;s operation. Supervise Children . An association may adopt reasonable rules&nbsp;regarding the supervision of children in the common area that do not directly prohibit or indirectly limit the daycare home. Condominiums Are Included .&nbsp;Even though H&amp;S Code &sect; 1597.40(a) refers to single-family residences, not condominiums. The legislative history shows that the statute was intended to apply to condominiums, apartments, and single-family homes.&nbsp;The statute defines a family day care home as a &ldquo;home that regularly provides care, protection, and supervision for 14 or fewer children, in the provider&rsquo;s own home, for periods of less than 24 hours per day, while the parents or guardians are away, and is either a large family day care home or a small family day care home.&rdquo; (H&amp;S &sect; 1596.78). Home is not defined to refer only to single-family homes.&nbsp;California&rsquo;s Department of Social Services publishes a self-assessment guide for family child care homes on its websites, which states, &ldquo;Even though the Health &amp; Safety Code refers to &lsquo;single-family residences,&rsquo; the law has historically been interpreted to protect providers in multiple dwellings such as apartments, condominiums, and other non-detached residences. It means that any legal residence can qualify to become a family child care home if it meets the licensing requirements.&rdquo; Case Law .&nbsp; Morrison v. Vineyard Creek &nbsp;(2011) 193 Cal is a case that discusses the issue.App.4th 1254. In this case, Ms. Morrison rented an apartment and then decided to run a daycare business out of the apartment. She notified the landlord. The landlord&rsquo;s attorney claimed H&amp;S section 1597.40 applies only to single-family homes. They denied her request and told her she would be in breach of her lease agreement. She sued the landlord.&nbsp;After the lawsuit was filed, the landlord obtained new counsel. The new counsel reviewed the legislative history of&nbsp;H&amp;S &sect;1597.40(a)&nbsp;and determined it did apply to apartments. The attorney called Ms. Morrison&rsquo;s attorney, withdrew his&nbsp;opposition to her daycare business, and agreed to compensate her for damages. The parties eventually reached a settlement agreement in which the landlord recognized Ms. Morrison&rsquo;s right to run a daycare from the apartment.&nbsp;The published appeal is regarding attorneys&rsquo; fees, so it doesn&rsquo;t decide whether H&amp;S &sect;1597.40 applies to apartments or condominiums, but it provides the above discussion. Amenity Usage : Can the day care provider use the pool area and other amenities for the children under her care? One tenant operates a home day care and brings four to five kids to the pool area. The CC&amp;Rs restrict the number of guests to two.&nbsp;ANSWER: Like other homeowners, operators of day care homes (owners and tenants) must comply with the association&rsquo;s rules and regulations. Thus, if the association restricts the number of guests each homeowner may have in the pool area, day care operators must follow the rules or be subject to disciplinary action. Group Care Homes As with&nbsp;daycare homes for children, associations cannot prohibit residential care facilities that service six or fewer persons. ( H&amp;S&nbsp;Code &sect; 1566.5 ) A residential facility is any family home or group care facility providing 24-hour non-medical care to persons in need. ( H&amp;S Code &sect; 1502(a)(1) ) These facilities are specifically defined as residential use of property by a single family. ( H&amp;S &sect; 1566.5 ) This effectively goes around an association&#39;s private restrictions. Sober Living Homes Associations cannot prohibit owners or tenants from operating an alcoholism or drug abuse recovery or treatment facility that serves six or fewer persons. ( H&amp;S Code &sect; 11834.23 ) The same is true for licensed non-medical alcohol and drug treatment facilities--homes that provide one or more of the following services: detoxification, educational sessions, and recovery or treatment planning.&nbsp;A sober living facility can represent challenges involving the following: rules violations parking violations and guest parking problems smoking in the common areas excessive and unsupervised use of recreational facilities requests for extra keys and vehicle stickers harassment and intimidation of staff and residents security problems and criminal activity excessive noise vandalism litter Recommendation : Because of the many protections afforded to daycare, group care, and sober living homes, boards should not tackle these issues without consulting legal counsel. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login