URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/D/Director-Records-Inspection-Rights

Right to Inspect Records You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME D Director Records Inspection Rights Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings DIRECTOR'S RIGHT TO INSPECT RECORDS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Member&#39;s Right to&nbsp;Inspect Director&#39;s&nbsp; Right to Inspect Records Retention Membership&nbsp; List Employee Salaries &amp; Records Director&#39;s Limited Right to Inspect Records With limited exceptions, board members have both a right and a duty to&nbsp; review financial records &nbsp;of the association. Although&nbsp; Corporations Code &sect; 8334 &nbsp;gives a director the &quot;absolute right&quot; to review corporate records, the courts have limited that right to protect privacy, avoid conflicts of interest, and protect&nbsp; attorney-client privilege . Privacy . In&nbsp; Chantiles v. Lake Forest , a candidate ran for the board and won but thought his friend should have won as well. As a new director, he wanted to inspect proxies to see how people voted. The board refused, and he sued. The court agreed with the board and decided that privacy rights outweighed a director&#39;s &quot;absolute&quot; right to inspect records. ( Chantiles v. Lake Forest II ) Conflict of Interest . In&nbsp; Tritek Telecom v. Superior Court , a board member of a nonprofit corporation sued the corporation. During the litigation, the director claimed an absolute right to view the corporation&#39;s records related to his litigation against the corporation. The board refused, citing&nbsp; attorney-client privilege . The Court of Appeal agreed with the board. It reasoned that a plaintiff director could not take off his &quot;shareholder&#39;s hat&quot; and swap it for his &quot;director&#39;s hat&quot; and claim an absolute right to access all corporate documents when it would advance his interests against those of the corporation. ( Tritek Telecom v. Superior Court )&nbsp;In&nbsp; Wolf v. CDS Devco , the court held that a director who threatened litigation against the association gave up his right to inspect particular corporate records. The court reiterated its earlier holding in&nbsp; Tritek v. Superior Court &nbsp;that a &ldquo;court may properly limit a director&rsquo;s inspection rights [when] the . . . director&rsquo;s loyalties are divided and documents obtained by a director . . . could be used to advance the director&#39;s personal interest in obtaining damages against the corporation.&rdquo; Violation of Fiduciary Duties . Courts may impose conditions upon a director&#39;s right to inspect a corporation&#39;s books and records. A director&#39;s right to inspect may be denied when a disgruntled director announces an intention to violate his fiduciary duties. ( Havlicek v. Coast-to-Coast Analytical Services ) Former Director . Former directors do not have any special inspection rights by virtue of their having been a director. Their inspection rights are the same as those of any other member of the association. As such, former directors do not have the right to inspect executive sessions or &quot;director-only&quot; records. For HOAs, director-only records generally encompass&nbsp; executive session &nbsp;matters. Former directors continue to have the same inspection rights as other members but nothing more. An exception may exist if the former director is being sued for acts taken as a director and needs the records to defend himself. ( Wolf v. CDS Devco ) Executive Minutes . Board members can review past and present executive session minutes unless a director has a conflict of interest involving a topic discussed at a particular executive session meeting at which he/she was not present. This restriction also applies to recordings (if any) of executive session meetings. ( Hamilton v. Town of Los Gatos ) Personnel Records .&nbsp;Despite the &ldquo;absolute&rdquo; language of&nbsp; Corporations Code &sect; 8334, &nbsp;the courts do not consider directors&rsquo; rights as absolute and are willing to limit them to protect constitutional rights and to protect against improper use of records. In&nbsp; Chantiles v. Lake Forest II , board member Tom Chantiles sought to compel the association to permit him to inspect ballots cast in an annual election of directors. This was before the implementation of secret balloting, which meant Chantiles would have learned from the inspection&nbsp;how each member voted. The court weighed Chantiles&rsquo; &ldquo;absolute&rdquo; rights as a director against the privacy rights of the membership and sided with members. The court held that privacy rights outweighed inspection rights regarding voting.&nbsp;Employees have a right to privacy.&nbsp;In&nbsp; Gilbert v. San Jose , (2004) 114 Cal.App.4th 606, the court looked at common law protections and held that before a city could disclose personal information collected under a city ordinance from employees working in the gambling industry, the employees must be given&nbsp;a fair opportunity to object to the disclosure and to limit the scope and nature of the information disclosed. Otherwise, the employees may have a claim for invasion of privacy under both common law and the California Constitution. Board Review . &nbsp;Even though individual directors cannot rummage through members&#39; files or personnel records, the entire board could review an owner&#39;s or employee&#39;s file related to a pending disciplinary action, maintenance issue, etc. Recommendation : When presented with a request from a director to inspect an employee&rsquo;s personnel file, boards should notify the employee of the request and afford the employee a fair opportunity to object to disclosure of all or a portion of the records. In determining whether to comply with the request, boards should weigh the director&rsquo;s right to inspect against the employee&rsquo;s right to privacy. In doing so, boards must consider (i) whether the director has a legitimate purpose for the information, (ii) whether the director can fulfill his/her duties without inspecting the file, and (iii) the employee&rsquo;s objections, if any.&nbsp;Based on prior related rulings, a court would likely deny a director&rsquo;s request to inspect personnel files because an employee&rsquo;s right to privacy outweighs a director&rsquo;s right to inspect corporate records. Therefore, boards may want to err on the side of protecting the employee&rsquo;s right to privacy and deny the director&rsquo;s request. From a legal standpoint, the association would be in a better position to defend itself in a lawsuit by a director denied access to an employee&rsquo;s personnel file than in an invasion of privacy suit by an employee. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login