URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/D/Duty-to-Fund-Reserves

Reserve Studies & Funding You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME D Duty to Fund Reserves Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings BOARD'S DUTY TO FUND RESERVES Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Annual Budgets Collections Audits &amp; Reviews Bank Accounts &amp; Loans Reserves Taxes Reserve Studies Duty to&nbsp; Fund Reserves Reserve Transfers &amp; Borrowing Investing Reserve Funds Capital&nbsp;Improvements Reserve&nbsp;Companies &nbsp;&nbsp; Managing Reserves Duty to Fund Reserves By statute, boards must impose regular and special assessments sufficient to perform their obligations under the governing documents, which include funding reserves. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5600(a) ) Setting aside sufficient funds to repair and replace major components is arguably one of those duties. In Raven&#39;s Cove v. Knuppe , the court held that the failure of the developer-controlled board to fund the reserves was a breach of the board&#39;s fiduciary duty . Special Assessments for Reserves . Boards must exercise prudent fiscal management in maintaining the integrity of the reserve account and shall, if necessary, levy a special assessment to recover the full amount of the expended funds within the time limits required by this section.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 5515(e) ) This special assessment is subject to the limitation imposed by Civil Code &sect; 5605(b) (unless the expenditures were for emergencies as defined by Civil Code &sect; 5610 ). At its discretion, the board may extend the date the payment on the special assessment is due. Any extension shall not prevent the board from pursuing any legal remedy to enforce the collection of an unpaid special assessment. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5515(e) ) A member of the Foothills Townhomes Association sued his association, claiming that a special assessment to fund the reserve account violated Civil Code&nbsp;&sect; 1366.1 [now Civ. Code &sect; 5600(b) ]. He argued that it &quot;exceeded the amount necessary to defray the costs for which it is levied&quot; because reserves were not required to be funded. The court disagreed and ruled that replenishing the association&#39;s reserve account was a valid basis for a special assessment. The plaintiff also argued the special assessment was unnecessary because the reserves could be funded incrementally over time. The court again disagreed: &quot;Whether the fund could have been replenished over time is irrelevant to whether the assessment exceeded costs for which it was levied. As a matter of law, an assessment does not violate Civil Code section 1366.1 [now&nbsp; &sect; 5600 ] merely because the costs could have been recouped incrementally. Nothing in the language of the statute suggests that it is so.&quot; ( Foothills Townhomes v. Christiansen ) Real Estate Fees . The issue is unsettled, but the fee limitation language in Civil Code &sect; 5600(b) makes it unlikely that associations can impose fees on the transfer of real estate&nbsp;to fund their reserves.&nbsp; What Are Prudent Funding Levels? How to Calculate Funding . Even though there is no mandate by the legislature to fund reserves, the prudent course is to fund reserves according to&nbsp;the association&#39;s reserve funding plan . To determine how healthy an association&#39;s reserves are, divide the amount of money actually in reserves by the amount that&nbsp; should &nbsp;be in the account. For example, if in year five, you have $25,000 instead of the $50,000 called for by your reserve study, you are only 50% funded. Members can expect special assessments if reserves are in the 0-30% funding range. Associations in the 70%+ funding range are considered financially strong, and special assessments should be rare. If the reserve account is&nbsp;over-funded, steps can be taken to bring it back into balance. Fully Funded . The definition of 100% funding is confusing to many people. If your association&#39;s reserve study states that you need to replace your roof in ten years for $100,000, &quot;fully funded&quot; does not mean that you have $100,000 today. It means you have $10,000 in the bank this year, $20,000 next year, $30,000 the following year, and so on until you have $100,000 in the 10th year when the roof is scheduled for replacement. It should be noted that the actual annual contribution for roofs would not be exactly $10,000 since reserve studies consider inflation, interest earned, and other factors that will change from year to year. As a result, the actual contribution will fluctuate around the $10,000 figure. Impact of Underfunded Reserves Special Assessments . If reserves are underfunded and associations are faced with large-scale repairs, boards have no choice but to levy a special assessment to raise funds needed to make repairs. To lessen the burden on members, associations often seek bank loans that allow them to make immediate repairs but spread the cost over a number of years so members can more easily pay for the repairs. Property Values .&nbsp;The founder of Association Reserves, Inc.,&nbsp;Robert Nordlund, conducted a study to see if property values were affected by the strength of an association&#39;s financial reserves. He compared the sales price&nbsp;(measured in cost per square foot)&nbsp;of units in 100 comparable condominium associations to their reserve fund strength (measured in % funded). He found that market values were 12.6% higher in associations with strong reserves (over 70% funded) than those with weak reserves (under 30% funded). Sophisticated realtors now take note of an association&#39;s reserve funding levels. Low levels portend special assessments.&nbsp; Fannie Mae Blacklist .&nbsp;Underfunded reserves and deferred maintenance can also cause a condominium association to be blacklisted by Fannie Mae--meaning lenders would stop funding loans to potential buyers of units in your association. That, in turn, would drive down property values. Insurance . Insurance carriers have recently come to understand that HOAs with insufficient reserves are less likely to make repairs to major components, such as water pipes, roofing, or waterproofing of decks and walkways. Deferred maintenance increases water leaks, which often result in insurance claims. An association&#39;s reserve study will inform them of the conditions of those major components and the association&#39;s financial capabilities to undertake the needed repairs and replacements. Underfunded reserves can be used to justify policy cancellations or rate increases. Reserve Funding Plan Prepare a Plan . Prepare and distribute a funding plan that indicates how the board plans to fund the annual contribution to meet the association&#39;s obligation to repair and replace all major components. The reserve funding plan must be adopted in an open meeting. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5560 ) Beginning January 1, 2009, boards must distribute their reserve funding plan to all members along with the association&#39;s annual operating budget, not less than 30 nor more than 90 days before the start of the association&#39;s fiscal year. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5300 )&nbsp;The summary of the association&#39;s reserves is not admissible to show improper financial management of an association, provided that other relevant and competent evidence of the financial condition of the association is not made inadmissible by this provision. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5300(d) ) Assessments . If the board determines an assessment increase is required to fund the reserves, the assessment must be adopted in an open meeting and separately from the adoption of the funding plan. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5550(b)(5) ) Required Reserve Disclosures Required Disclosures . Boards are required to make the following reserve disclosures: Deficiencies .&nbsp; Disclose any deficiencies in the reserves expressed on a per-unit basis. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5565(d) ) &nbsp; Deferrals . Disclose whether the board plans to defer repairs or replacement of any major component, including a justification for the deferral. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5300(b)(4) ) &nbsp; Loans . Disclose whether the association has any outstanding loans with an original term of more than one year, including the payee, interest rate, amount outstanding, annual payment, and when the loan is scheduled to be retired. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5300(b)(8) ) &nbsp; Reserve Funding Plan . Distribute the&nbsp;reserve funding plan along with the association&#39;s annual operating budget. &nbsp; Form of Disclosures. &nbsp; Prepare and distribute specific reserve funding disclosures that comply with Civil&nbsp;Code &sect; 5570 . NOTE: There seems to be some concern over paragraph (3) in the Funding Disclosure Summary , which requires a definitive &quot;yes&quot; or &quot;no&quot; answer regarding future events over which the association has no control. While it is helpful for members to find a clear yes or no answer, boards anxious about potential liability may add qualifying language stating the answer is only a projection. The association&#39;s attorney and/or reserve preparer can provide appropriate modifying language.&nbsp;Paragraph (7) also raises questions. It calls for a number of estimates for each of the five years. If those estimates appear in the more complete 30-year Funding Plan, that document can be attached, more than satisfying the Paragraph (7) 5-year requirement. Disclosure Window .&nbsp; The disclosure must be made not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days before the beginning of the association&#39;s fiscal year. This is an improvement over the old requirement, which had a 15-day window for making the disclosure. For other disclosures, see the&nbsp; disclosure checklist . ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login