URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/D/Director-Appointments

Director Appointments You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME D Director Appointments Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings DIRECTOR APPOINTMENTS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Boards of Directors Board Meetings Committees Management Board&nbsp;Authority &amp; Duties Fiduciary&nbsp;Duties Ethics Censure Provisional&nbsp; Directors Director&nbsp;Resignations Director Appointments Officers Appointing Directors Vacancy Created by a Recall .&nbsp; If a vacancy is due to the membership&#39;s removal of one or more directors&nbsp;via a recall election, the board cannot fill the vacancies--only the membership can fill the seat(s) using an election.&nbsp;( Corp. Code &sect; 7224(a) ) Directors so elected&nbsp;shall serve the remaining terms of the directors they replaced.&nbsp; Declaring a Seat Vacant .&nbsp;Sometimes, a board can remove a director by declaring their seat vacated because the person is no longer qualified to hold the seat. For example, the person sold their unit. One of the requirements for holding office is to be an owner of a unit&nbsp;in the association. Another example is where the bylaws require a director to attend meetings. If the person misses a specified number of meetings, the board can remove the person from the board.&nbsp; Appoint a Replacement . Unless otherwise provided in the bylaws and except for a vacancy created by the removal of a director, vacancies on the board may be filled by the approval of a majority of the remaining directors on the board. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7224(a) ) This general principle is also described in Robert&#39;s Rules of Order: &quot;The power to appoint or elect persons to any office or board carries with it the power to accept their resignations, and also the power to fill any vacancy occurring in it, unless the&nbsp; bylaws &nbsp;expressly provide otherwise.&quot; ( RONR (12th ed.) 47:57 )&nbsp;If the vacancy occurs close to an annual meeting, the board might decide to leave the seat empty and let the membership fill it. Vote by Resigning Director . A&nbsp;resigning director&nbsp;controls the date and time of his/her departure from the board. Resigning directors may set the effective dates and times of their resignations. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7224(c) ) Directors remain in office and continue to fully function as directors until their resignations become effective. They may also participate in the&nbsp;appointment of their replacement. Doing so helps avoid deadlocked boards. The resigning director may participate in the selection of his/her replacement, provided the selection takes place before the effective date of the resignation. ( Mayo v. Interment Properties ) Failure to Appoint a Replacement .&nbsp;If the board fails or refuses to fill an empty position, the membership can&nbsp; petition the board &nbsp;for a special membership meeting to fill the vacant seat. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7224(b) ) Candidates and Term of Office While interviewing candidates may be done privately, a director&#39;s appointment should be done in an&nbsp;open session. Voting to fill a vacancy does not fall into any of the&nbsp; approved categories for executive session . The vote to fill an empty seat must be on the meeting&#39;s agenda. Term of Office. &nbsp;The appointed&nbsp; director&#39;s term of office &nbsp;shall be as provided for in the&nbsp; bylaws .&nbsp; Shifting Directors . Unless the governing documents provide otherwise, boards can appoint an existing director to fill the longer term of a resigning director. For example, a person elected to a 2-year term on the board resigns three months into the term, and an existing director with less than a year remaining in their term is appointed to fill the seat, the appointed director remains in office for the remainder of the resigning director&#39;s 2-year term. The appointed director does not assume the office of the resigning director (president, secretary, treasurer), only the seat of the resigning director. For example, the resigning director is the president with a 2-year term. The person appointed to fill the director&#39;s seat is appointed only to the seat, not the office. If the board wants the appointed director to also assume the office of president, it must additionally appoint the director to that office. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login