URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/D/Director-Term-of-Office

Director Term of Office You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME D Director Term of Office Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings DIRECTOR TERM OF OFFICE Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Director Elections Campaigning Director Term of Office Director&nbsp;Elections Acclamation Other Elections Recall&nbsp; Elections Annual, Special &amp; Town Hall&nbsp;Meetings Ballots&nbsp;&amp; Proxies Inspectors of Election &nbsp; Qualifications and Nominations Candidate&nbsp; Statements Quorum Voting Rights &amp; Cumulative Voting Election Rules An association&#39;s bylaws establish a&nbsp;director&#39;s term in office. In unincorporated associations, they may be found in the CC&amp;Rs. Once elected, &quot;Except as otherwise provided in the articles or bylaws, each director, including a director elected to fill a vacancy, shall hold office until the expiration of the term for which elected and until a successor has been elected.&quot; ( Corp. Code&nbsp;&sect; 7220(b) ) Adopting Director Staggered Terms Staggered terms are allowed under&nbsp; Corporations Code &sect; 7220(a) : &quot;[The] bylaws may provide for staggering the terms of directors by dividing the total number of directors into groups of one or more directors.&nbsp;The terms of office of the several groups and the number of directors in each group need not be uniform.&quot;&nbsp;Original bylaws from developers often set the term of office at one year, which requires all directors to stand for election every year. Most associations eventually amend this provision to establish two-year staggered terms to create stability and continuity on the board. Unless bylaws provide otherwise, staggered terms also apply to&nbsp;appointed directors. Different Kinds of Term Limits In 2019, a&nbsp;bill sponsored by Marjorie Murray&#39;s Center for California Homeowner Association Law (CCHAL) voided&nbsp;term limits for directors in every association in California. It created such an outcry of protests that the Legislature in 2022&nbsp;restored the&nbsp;right to term limits. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&nbsp;&sect; 5103(d)(2) )&nbsp;A term limit restricts the&nbsp;number of years or terms a person can serve on the&nbsp;board of directors. Such limits are normally found in an&nbsp;association&#39;s bylaws. If properly drafted, term limits can be positive. No Term Limits . &nbsp;If no term limits exist in an association&#39;s governing documents, directors can be elected and re-elected indefinitely.&nbsp; Strict Limits .&nbsp; Strict term limits allowing owners to serve one or two terms and forever bar them from the board are unworkable. It is much too difficult to recruit members to serve on the board. Also, what happens when everyone in the association has served on the board? Accordingly, strict limits should NOT be adopted. Step Down One Year . &nbsp;A more common term limit allows directors to serve two terms, requiring them to step down for a year. This allows other owners the opportunity to serve on the board without permanently barring seasoned directors from serving at a later date. Even this limitation can be problematic if no other owners are willing to serve on the board. By statute, &quot;An association shall disqualify a person from nomination as a candidate for not being a member of the association at the time of the nomination. An association shall disqualify a nominee if that person has served the maximum number of terms or sequential terms allowed by the association.&quot; ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(b) ) Flexible Limits . To avoid the potential problem of a mandatory requirement that directors step off the board for one year, term limitations should only take effect if other members are willing to serve. To create this flexibility, bylaws should be amended . Amend Documents to Change Terms Adding Term Limits . Term limits can be added by amending the bylaws . Amending the Election Rules should also be sufficient. Civil Code &sect; 5105(b) &nbsp;states that &quot;An association shall disqualify a nominee if that person has served the maximum number of terms or sequential terms allowed by the association.&quot; The statute does not refer to where the term limitation is found. Therefore, amending&nbsp;the election rules should be sufficient to impose term limits without reference to the bylaws. Change the Term of Office . No amendment of the articles or bylaws&nbsp;may extend the term of a director beyond that for which the director was elected, nor may any bylaw provision increasing the terms of directors be adopted without membership approval. ( Corp. Code&nbsp;&sect; 7220(a) ) Miscellaneous Filling Vacant Seat s . Unless the articles or bylaws provide otherwise, a director appointed to fill a vacant seat holds office until the expiration of the term of the seat for which he/she is appointed and until a successor has been elected. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7220(b) ) If a person elected to a 2-year term on the board resigns three months into the term and a replacement director is appointed, the appointed director remains in office for the remainder of the 2-year term. Most bylaws contain language similar to that found in the Corporations Code. Sometimes, however, bylaws will require appointed directors to stand for election at the next annual meeting. Following is an example of such language: &quot;a person so appointed shall be a director until a successor is elected at the next annual meeting of the association.&quot; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login