URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/E/Exterior-Painting

Exterior Painting You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME E Exterior Painting Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings EXTERIOR PAINTING Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Maintenance Pest Control Plumbing Balcony Inspections Asbestos &amp; Mold Reserves Maintenance Duties Painting Asphalt Trees Sidewalks Parking&nbsp;Structures Maintenance &nbsp;District Roofs Associations are obligated to maintain the common areas. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4775 ) Unless the CC&amp;Rs provide otherwise, that includes painting the exterior of all buildings. Stucco surfaces, wood trim (and siding), and metal have different painting cycles. These should be incorporated into the association&#39;s reserve study. Paint Lifecycle The duration of paint on an exterior surface depends on factors such as the qualify of the paint, the type of surface painted (stucco, wood, metal), how well the surface is prepared, and the harshness of the environment (ocean, desert, mountain). Subject to these factors, the following is a general rule of thumb for repainting exterior surfaces: Stucco: 7 to 10 years Wood: 5 to 7 years Metal: 2 to 3 years Paint Specifications To preserve warranties, boards should ensure that the paint manufacturer&#39;s requirements are made part of the painter&#39;s contract. At a minimum, the following must be specified in the painting contract: Preparing the Surfaces. All surfaces must be properly prepared before applying paint. This may require power washing, scraping loose paint flakes with a wire brush, sanding surfaces, and caulking wall cracks and around windows. Protection of Surrounding Areas. Masking windows, covering shrubbery, etc. should be specified. Type of Paint. The types of paints required for the various surfaces must be specified, such as oil or water-based, manufacturer of&nbsp;paint, etc. Is a primer coat required? How Applied. How the paint is applied, the number of coats and the thickness must be specified. This should be supplied by the manufacturer for its warranty. Warning Signs of Problems Problems with a past or current painting problem will often show the following signs: Peeling . Peeling is often the result of painting over wet wood. It can also result from moisture within the structure pushing its way out. Another cause of peeling is a dirty or a glossy surface. Alligatoring . This occurs when paint shrinks into individual islands, exposing the previous surface, usually because the top coat is not adhering to the paint below. Perhaps the paints are not compatible or the second coat was applied before the first coat had dried. Blistering . Paint that rises from the surface and forms blisters is usually due to moisture or improper painting. Wrinkling . New paint can run and sag into a series of droops. This occurs when the paint was applied too thickly and forms a surface film over the still-liquid paint below. It can also happen if the paint is applied in cold weather; the cold surface slows drying underneath. Chalking . This is paint that has a dusty surface. Some oil based and alkyd based paints are designed to &quot;chalk&quot; when it rains. When this happens, a very fine powdery layer is removed, automatically cleaning the surface. In most cases, this is desirable. But if foundations, sidewalks, and shrubs become stained, too much chalking is occurring. This may be due to painting over a too-porous surface that has absorbed too much of the paint&#39;s binding agents. A chemical imbalance in an inferior paint may also be the cause of excessive chalking. Mildew . This moldy growth appears where dampness and shade prevail. And, paint is applied over it, it&#39;s likely to come right through the new paint. Running Sags . This is usually caused when a painter uses a paintbrush incorrectly (e.g., too much paint on the brush), which creates a wavy, irregular surface. Recommendation : All contracts should contain appropriate warranties and should be reviewed by the association&#39;s legal counsel. Failure to do so could be costly if the painting project does not go well. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login