URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/E/Earthquake-Insurance

Earthquake Insurance You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME E Earthquake Insurance Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings HOA EARTHQUAKE INSURANCE Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links HOA Insurance Contractors, Owners &amp; Renters Fire Safety Board&#39;s&nbsp;Duties HOA&nbsp;Insurance Fidelity Bonds &amp; Employee Dishonesty Cyber Crime Insurance Workers&#39; Compensation Earthquake&nbsp; Insurance Tendering&nbsp;Claims Insurance Deductibles Homeowner Association Insurance Associations are not obligated to buy earthquake insurance unless required by their governing documents. Even so, the better course of action for condominium associations in high-risk areas is to buy earthquake insurance. This is especially true since individual members cannot insure the structure around their units; only the association can. Fiduciary Duty . When members vote against earthquake insurance, they have no duty to act in the best interest of other members. On the other hand, boards have a&nbsp; fiduciary duty &nbsp;to make decisions that are in the best interests of the association as a whole. Since earthquakes can be devastating, that would argue in favor of overriding the membership&#39;s vote if the association is in an area vulnerable to earthquake damage.&nbsp;Accordingly, boards should consider factors such as the location of fault lines, the type of soil upon which the structures are built (are they vulnerable to liquefaction?), the type of construction in the development (wood frame, steel &amp; concrete, etc.) and premium costs, deductibles, and pay-out levels. Funding the Insurance . If the board decides to set aside a membership vote, it faces a practical problem--how to fund the insurance.&nbsp;The board can either increase annual dues or impose a special assessment. For most associations, the cost of earthquake insurance is more than the&nbsp; 5% special assessment &nbsp;limitation imposed by the Davis-Stirling Act, which effectively eliminates this funding option.&nbsp;The other option is to increase annual membership dues by up to 20% &nbsp;to cover the cost. However, the dues increase only applies to next year&#39;s budget. If the board wants to immediately purchase earthquake insurance, it can bridge the funding gap by&nbsp; borrowing money &nbsp;from reserves and repaying it within one year. Business Judgment Rule . If the board chooses not to override the members&#39; vote, its decision is governed by the&nbsp; Business Judgment Rule , which means directors are not subject to personal liability if their decisions are made in good faith, in the best interests of the association, and with such care as an ordinarily prudent person would use. Board Authority to Purchase . Even though earthquake insurance is normally discretionary, boards can purchase and renew it without membership approval, provided the premiums are within the association&#39;s budget limitations (20% increase for regular dues or 5% for special assessments). If the premiums require an increase above these limitations, boards need membership approval. Discontinuing Insurance .&nbsp;There is no law requiring associations to purchase earthquake insurance. The only obligation to carry such insurance might be found in the association&#39;s governing documents. If no such obligation exists, boards can discontinue earthquake insurance.&nbsp;Before doing so, boards&nbsp;should seek membership input.&nbsp;If any changes are made in the association&#39;s insurance (cancellation, non-renewal, changes in deductibles, etc.), the board must immediately notify the membership. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5810 ) Homeowners Earthquake Insurance In addition to any insurance purchased by the association, owners can&nbsp;buy a residential policy through the California Earthquake Authority.&nbsp;Homeowners can calculate the cost of a CEA policy with their &quot; Premium Calculator .&quot; What it Covers . The&nbsp; California Earthquake Authority &nbsp;(CEA) offers basic coverage to owners of condominiums. Coverage can be purchased through a homeowner&#39;s insurance agent and can be bought regardless of any insurance carried by the association. With limitations, it pays for: damage to personal property interior damage emergency living expenses special assessments levied by condominium associations to pay for earthquake-related repairs to residential structures What is Not Covered . While California Earthquake Authority Insurance is important for all owners to carry, there are risks if the association does not carry earthquake insurance and instead relies entirely on the CEA&rsquo;s loss assessment coverage. CEA loss assessment will only pay for damage to residential structures. It does not cover pools, clubhouses, detached garages, patio coverings, walkways, driveways, fences, etc. It will not pay for bringing residential structures up to building code standards. It will not pay for special assessments to cover bad debt (caused by members who walk away from their units). Relying on owners to carry loss assessment coverage is risky. Many or most owners will not carry it, thereby providing limited resources for rebuilding after an earthquake. The maximum coverage for CEA Loss Assessment is $75,000, and the deductible is 15% of the coverage amount. Because of these limitations, boards would be ill-advised to forgo earthquake insurance and rely solely on owners purchasing earthquake loss assessment coverage. Seismic Gas Shut-Off Valves QUESTION : Our association looked into installing seismic gas shut-off valves but the board is concerned that they may have liability in the event there is an earthquake and the valves fail. They don&#39;t want to open themselves to liability unnecessarily. Is this a valid concern? ANSWER : A seismic valve automatically shuts off natural gas to a building when an earthquake of a sufficient magnitude occurs. Turning off the gas greatly reduces the risk of explosions and fires after a major earthquake. They are so effective that (i) some insurance companies will reduce the cost of insurance if they are installed and (ii) some cities require shut-off valves on all new construction and any remodeling valued at $10,000 or more. Recommendation : &nbsp;Not installing seismic valves because they might fail is a poor argument against safety equipment. The potential damage from explosions and fire is much greater than the potential liability from a failure. With all the recent earthquake activity around the world, the more prudent course of action is to install the valves. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login