URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/E/Educating-Legislators

Educating Legislators You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME E Educating Legislators Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings EDUCATING LEGISLATORS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Following are ways that you can get involved in educating your legislators about issues that affect associations in California: Letters/Emails . Written communication is still the most common way people have of communicating with their legislators. Be sure to have your name and address included so the legislator may respond and will know that you are a constituent--being able to vote for them (or for their competitor!) is a big motivator in paying attention to your letters. Use each letter to address one issue and try to keep it brief and to the point. Be sure to include the following: First Paragraph . Identify yourself as a constituent; if it is regarding a specific bill, include the bill number and name; if writing on behalf of an association, include the number of units. Second Paragraph . Indicate your position on the bill; point out the impact the bill will have on you and/or your association. Third Paragraph . Include ideas of how to improve the legislation (if appropriate). Fourth/Final Paragraph : Thank the legislator for his/her time and attention to your concerns. Phone Calls . Calls to legislators right before a crucial vote can be very helpful. Know that often you will not be speaking to the legislator themselves, but ask to speak to the staff member who handles the issue you are calling about. The information will be passed along to the legislator. Keep in mind the following: Identify yourself as a constituent. Be courteous, brief and to the point. Be ready to give the bill number and name. Clearly state your position and the action you expect from the legislator (support/oppose/amend). Provide your name, address and telephone number. After the call, follow up with a personal letter or e-mail reiterating what you stated in the call. Personal Visits . Building a relationship and establishing rapport with your legislators can go a long way toward helping your areas of concern be addressed. Be sure to call prior to your visit and schedule an appointment (usually on Fridays when the legislature is in session.) Be prepared for dates/times to be canceled or delayed as legislators&rsquo; schedules have to change rapidly to accommodate urgent meetings, hearings or votes. Do your homework and have a good, comprehensive knowledge of the issue you want to discuss with the legislator, and be sure to let them know in advance the topics you would like to discuss. As you would with a phone call or e-mail, be sure to be ready with the following: Have a business card ready to give to the legislator and whatever staff will be in the meeting, and identify yourself as a constituent. Be courteous, brief and to the point. Be ready to give the bill number and name, and if you have information on the bill, have multiple copies to hand out to the legislator and their staff. Clearly state your position and the action you expect from the legislator (support/oppose/amend). Get a business card before you leave, and after the meeting, follow up with a personal letter or e-mail thanking them for their time and attention to your concerns. Once these initial methods of education have begun, you can continue to monitor the issue or legislation, and send follow-up letters/e-mails to let the legislator know you are still interested. Eventually the legislator will come to rely on you as someone who can communicate helpful information when needed, and they will have the education they need to make better decisions for associations in California. Article provided by Kimberly Lilley, Director of Marketing for Berg Insurance Agency and Chair of the San Diego California Legislative Action Committee. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login