URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/E/Employee-Contracts-Salaries-Personnel-Records

Employee Contracts, Salaries & Personnel Records You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME E Employee Contracts, Salaries & Personnel Records Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings EMPLOYEE CONTRACTS, SALARIES & RECORDS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Member&#39;s Right to&nbsp;Inspect Director&#39;s&nbsp; Right to Inspect Records Retention Membership&nbsp; List Employee Salaries &amp; Records Disclosing Employee Salaries Upon request, associations must provide compensation information for all employees, including the&nbsp;general manager&nbsp;as follows, &quot;Except as provided by the attorney-client privilege , the association may not withhold or&nbsp; redact information &nbsp;concerning the compensation paid to employees, vendors, or contractors. Compensation information for individual employees shall be set forth by job classification or title, not by the employee&#39;s name, social security number, or other personal information.&quot; ( Civ. Code &sect; 5215(b) )&nbsp; Because the Legislature used the word &quot;or&quot; in describing how employee salaries must be shown (&quot;job classification or title&quot;) in an &quot;association record&quot; that is being provided to a member to inspect, the decision of which format to use is the association&#39;s, not the person requesting the information. It is clear the Legislature wished to preserve employee anonymity as much as possible when making compensation disclosures that are part of an &quot;association record.&quot;&nbsp;It then added further protections by prohibiting the listing of an employee&#39;s name, social security number, or other personal information. List of Employees .&nbsp;Associations are&nbsp;not&nbsp;required to provide a list of its employees&nbsp;to members.&nbsp;The right to salary information applies to the association&#39;s employees, not to the employees of the association&#39;s management company, or its vendors. Compensation Undefined .&nbsp;Disclosing employee compensation was included in AB 104, signed into law in 2003, that dealt with financial disclosures. There is no commentary related to what the legislature meant by employee compensation. It would be reasonable to define it as salary plus any nondiscretionary bonuses.&nbsp; Employee Year-End Bonuses QUESTION : According to an article in the LA Times, boards cannot give year-end bonuses to employees without membership approval. And even then it may affect the association&#39;s tax status. Our HOA has been giving bonuses for years. Are directors in breach of their fiduciary duties? Will we lose our tax status? ANSWER : The LA Times article gave exceptionally bad advice. Boards CAN give employees year-end bonuses. Doing so is not a breach of the board&#39;s fiduciary duties nor does it affect the association&#39;s tax status. Personnel Issues . Boards have the authority to hire employees and contract with vendors to provide services to the membership. This power is found in virtually every set of bylaws. In addition, associations (through their boards) &quot;may exercise the powers granted to a nonprofit mutual benefit corporation&quot; unless the governing documents specifically provide otherwise. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4805(a) ) This gives broad authority to boards to act on behalf of their associations. Compensation . The authority to hire employees and contract with vendors means boards can pay for those services. An employee&#39;s compensation can include year-end bonuses, either as part of a negotiated compensation package or as a reward to employees for rendering exemplary service to the association. Boards do not need membership approval to hire, compensate and give bonuses. The Davis-Stirling Act specifically makes personnel and contract issues&nbsp; executive session &nbsp;topics for boards to address to the exclusion of the membership. Case Law . The board&#39;s authority to use HOA money for more than just repairing common areas came before the courts in&nbsp; Finley v. Superior Court . In that case, a board used HOA funds to fight the conversion of a nearby military base into a commercial airport. Members of the association sued claiming this was a misuse of their funds and exceeded the board&#39;s authority. The court found that political contributions were not illegal and that boards can take actions they believe are in the best interests of the association, even if members disagree. Benefits the Association . The&nbsp; Business Judgment Rule &nbsp;protects directors from personal liability if their decisions are in error, provided they are in good faith and in the best interests of the association. In this case, employee bonuses benefit the association. They establish good will with employees, promote stability in the workforce, and encourage good work. Disaffected employees and high turnover are clearly not in the association&rsquo;s best interests&mdash;they can be far more costly to an association than a year-end bonus. Tax Status . Giving a bonus to employees will NOT result in tax penalties or the loss of an association&#39;s status as a nonprofit mutual benefit corporation. Vendor Employees . For convenience, employees of associations are sometimes put on the payroll of the management company. Doing so does not preclude the board from giving year-end bonuses to these individuals. Personnel Records Employees have a right to privacy.&nbsp;Personnel matters include anything involving employees including, but not limited to, hiring, firing, raises, disciplinary matters, performance reviews, and adopting or amending employee policies are under thye purview of the board of directors and are to be heard in executive session . ( Civ. Code &sect; 4935 )&nbsp; Not even board members individually have the right to inspect personnel records.&nbsp; Inspecting Employee Contracts In the context of community association document inspections by members, the Davis-Stirling Act defines &quot;association records&quot; to include &quot;executed contracts not otherwise privileged under law.&quot; ( Civ. Code &sect; 5200(a)(4) ) The Act further provides that for the purpose of member inspections, &quot;contracts for management&quot; are not &quot;privileged contracts.&quot; ( Civ. Code &sect; 5215(a)(5)(D) ) Independent Contractors . It is clear that management contracts with independent contractors including portfolio management companies are not &quot;privileged contracts&quot; and therefore are subject to inspection by association members. There is a split of opinion as to whether members are entitled to review a general manager&#39;s employment agreement. Employment Agreements . Some associations employ a general manager (sometimes called an &quot;executive director&quot;) as an employee of the association whose job is to oversee other employees of the association and be responsible for the general administration of the association&#39;s business affairs. It is common for the general manager to have an employment agreement with the association, and occasionally members will ask to review that employment agreement. OPINION #1: NO RIGHT TO INSPECT . California&#39;s Constitution specifically recognizes the inalienable right of privacy&ndash;a right the courts have applied to employment information. In recognition of this constitutional right of privacy, the Davis-Stirling Act expressly excludes from the broad scope of community association member inspection rights &quot;personnel records&quot; and information regarding compensation paid to individual employees. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5215(a)(5)(E) &amp; (b) )&nbsp;The Davis-Stirling Act also recognizes a distinction between employees and vendors when it comes to disclosures ( Civ. Code &sect; 5375 ) as well as rules that managing agents must follow in the handling of association funds. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5380 ) In both statutes, the term &quot;managing agent&quot; expressly excludes full-time employees of the association. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5375 ; &sect; 5385 )&nbsp;Finally, advocates of employee privacy believe that the protections found in Labor Code &sect; 1197.5(d) include employment agreements when it states that &quot;Every employer shall maintain records of the wages and wage rates, job classifications, and other terms and conditions of employment of the persons employed by the employer.&quot; OPINION #2: RIGHT TO INSPECT . Attorneys who believe a manager&#39;s contract is subject to inspection argue that Civil Code &sect; 5215(b) begins with the opening statement that the items listed in that subparagraph may be withheld or redacted from what is otherwise an &quot;association record&quot; under (a)(1). The implication is that the subparagraph is talking about permissible exclusions from a larger document that is an association record and one of the listed exclusions is for &quot;personnel records, other than payroll records, required to be provided under paragraph (2).&quot; Subparagraph (d)(2) does not use the term &quot;personnel records.&quot; Instead it states: &quot; Except as provided by the attorney-client privilege , the association may not withhold or redact information concerning the compensation paid to employees, vendors, or contractors. Compensation information for individual employees shall be set forth by job classification or title, not by the employee&#39;s name, social security number, or other personal information.&quot;&nbsp; In most employment agreements, compensation includes not only salary but additional benefits such as car allowance, severance payments, health insurance, a 401(k) retirement fund, perhaps a residence, and&nbsp;so forth. Those compensation items are not included in the association&#39;s &quot;payroll records&quot; so it can be argued that the association must produce the contract so as to reveal all compensation items. Recommendation : Until this issue has been clarified by the courts or the legislature, boards should rely on the advice of counsel as to whether an onsite manager&#39;s contract should be made available for inspection and copying. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login