URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/E/Executive-Session-Meetings

Executive Session Meetings You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME E Executive Session Meetings Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings CLOSED EXECUTIVE SESSION MEETINGS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Boards of Directors Board Meetings Committees Management Open&nbsp;Meetings Executive&nbsp;Sessions Emergency Meetings Zoom&nbsp;Meetings Emails Quorum Minutes Motions and&nbsp;Votes Meeting Notice &amp; Agenda Who Can Attend? Open Forum Recording&nbsp;Meetings &nbsp; 2-Minute Video Executive Session Agendas Notice of Meeting + Agenda .&nbsp;If a non-emergency board meeting is held solely in executive session, the association shall give notice of the time and place of the meeting at least two days before the meeting. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4920(b)(2) ) Notice of an executive session meeting must contain an agenda for the meeting. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4920(d) ) Agenda Items . Because executive sessions are confidential and topics are only generally noted in open meeting minutes ( Civ. Code &sect; 4935(e) ), agenda descriptions should be brief and general in nature. Boards may not take action on any item at a non-emergency meeting unless the item was placed on the&nbsp;agenda&nbsp;included in the notice given to the membership. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4930(a) ) Emergency Agenda Items . If an item of business comes to the attention of the board after the agenda is distributed, and if a majority of the board present at the meeting determines that an emergency exists, it can be added to the agenda at the meeting. An emergency is defined as &quot;circumstances that could not have been reasonably foreseen by the board, that require immediate attention&quot; and making it impracticable to provide notice. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4930(d)(1) ) Allowable Executive Session Topics&nbsp; Executive sessions of the board of directors are provided by statute so boards can address confidential matters. Because they are confidential, members do not have a right to attend the meetings or to review executive session minutes. As provided for in C ivil Code &sect; 4935 , boards may go into executive session for the following five enumerated matters. 1.&nbsp; Litigation . Boards may go into executive session &ldquo;to consider litigation.&quot; Guidance on &quot;litigation&quot; can be found in the Brown Act, which defines it broadly to include (i) litigation that has been initiated, (ii) situations in which there is significant exposure to litigation, and (iii) circumstances where litigation is contemplated. (Govt. Code &sect;&sect; 54950-54963)&nbsp; Legal Advice . Boards also have a right to meet in executive session to receive legal advice to protect the attorney-client privilege. (Evid. Code &sect;&sect; 950-962)&nbsp;See&nbsp; Reporting Litigation to the Membership . 2.&nbsp; Formation of Contracts . Boards may consider matters relating to the formation of contracts with third parties. 3.&nbsp; Disciplinary Hearings .&nbsp;Boards should meet in executive session for all disciplinary hearings . The accused member is entitled to attend the executive session for that portion of the meeting dealing with the member&#39;s hearing. 4.&nbsp; Personnel Issues .&nbsp;Personnel matters include anything involving employees, including, but not limited to, hiring, firing, raises, disciplinary matters, performance reviews, and adopting or amending employee policies. Filling officer or director vacancies and appointing or removing committee members do not qualify as personnel matters. They need to be done in an open session. 5.&nbsp; Payment Plans . The board may meet with members in executive session to discuss requests by delinquent members for payment plans . OTHER ISSUES . The above list of topics is not exhaustive and does not exclude other matters that require confidentiality. For example: 6.&nbsp; Foreclosure . The decision to initiate foreclosure shall be made only by the board of directors of the association and may not be delegated to an agent of the association. The board must approve the decision by a majority vote of the directors in executive session.&nbsp;( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 5705(c) ) 7.&nbsp; Disability Requests . When a disabled person requests reasonable accommodation for their disability. California Code of Regulations 12176(b)(1) requires, &quot;All information concerning an individual&rsquo;s disability, request for an accommodation, or medical verification or information must be kept confidential and must not be shared with other persons...&quot; 8.&nbsp; Mental Illness . When a resident has a mental illness that is impacting other members of the association, such as hoarders. 9.&nbsp; Director Censure . When a director is disrupting meetings, violating confidentiality, harassing vendors and/or staff, etc., the board may need to discuss possible censure of the director. This may involve legal issues, which also puts it under one of the six Davis-Stirling topics for executive session discussions. 10. Termination of a Contract . Boards may not want a vendor to know that it is contemplating the termination of the vendor&#39;s contract. There may be legal ramifications that need to be discussed with legal counsel.&nbsp;Although terminating a contract is not one of the approved categories for executive session, canceling contracts&nbsp; should &nbsp;be done in executive session. Before ending a contract, boards often engage in a wide-ranging discussion&nbsp;about problems with the contractor, possible legal consequences related to the termination, and input from legal counsel on how best to minimize legal exposure (potential litigation is one of the&nbsp;approved reasons&nbsp;for discussing matters in executive session).&nbsp;If the debate about terminating a contract were done openly, it would compromise the association&#39;s legal position and expose the board to potential claims from the contractor. Accordingly, discussions related to the termination should take place in executive session. Anytime the board contemplates terminating a contract, it should get the&nbsp;advice of counsel. 11. Potential Liability Issues . There may be other issues of concern over potential liability that need to be discussed with legal counsel.&nbsp;Non-litigation matters, such as legal opinions related to insurance, personnel, maintenance, easements, recalls, etc., would also be appropriate topics for executive session. Whenever the association&#39;s attorney is giving&nbsp;legal advice&nbsp;to the board, it is protected under&nbsp; Evidence Code &sect;&sect; 950-962 . Duty of Confidentiality Board members must keep confidential information confidential.&nbsp;The authority to release information is held by the board as a whole, not by individual directors. Once the information is released, it cannot be taken back. Accordingly, directors who release information without board approval could face significant consequences. Directors who violate their duty of confidentiality regarding information gained in executive session are subject to censure &nbsp;and personal liability for their behavior, i.e., they lose the protections of the Business Judgment Rule . They might also be excluded from future executive session meetings by the formation of an executive committee . For more information, see Fiduciary Duties .&nbsp; Who May Attend Executive Session Meetings As noted above, members do not have a right to attend executive session meetings. However, that does not mean the meetings are limited to directors only. Directors, managers, recording secretaries, the association&#39;s legal counsel, members subject to disciplinary action, as well as witnesses (but only for that portion of the meeting involving the disciplinary hearing), and others invited by the board (such as vendors bidding on a project) may attend executive session meetings. Form of the Meeting, Scheduling &amp; Notice Executive session meetings can be held by any of the following methods: Directors can meet in person at a physical location. Emergency meetings via email are allowed.&nbsp; Directors can meet via telephone or video conference . A &quot;unanimous written consent&quot; may be used for emergency actions. Scheduling the Meeting . Unless otherwise provided in the articles of incorporation or in the bylaws, executive board meetings may be called by the chairman, president, or any vice president or the secretary, or any two directors. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7211(a)(1 )) An emergency meeting of the board may be called by the president or by any two members of the board other than the president. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4923 ) Email discussion of director availability for the meeting, as well as the date and time for the meeting, is allowed. Scheduling discussions are not deemed &quot;board meetings&quot; and do not violate the Davis-Stirling Act. Notice to Members. Starting January 1, 2012, members must be given notice of executive session meetings of the board. This is required regardless of anything to the contrary in an association&#39;s governing documents . With an Open Meeting . If an executive session is held with a scheduled open meeting of the board, it must be included in the open meeting&#39;s four-day notice and generally noted in the open meeting agenda . &nbsp; Between Open Meetings . If a non-emergency meeting is to be held solely in executive session, members must be given notice of the time and place of the meeting at least two (2) days before the meeting.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 4920(b)(2) ) If an association&#39;s governing documents require a longer notice, it must be followed. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4920(b)(3) ) Notice must be posted in a prominent place or places in the common areas and by mail to any owner who had requested notice by mail (at the address requested by the owner). In addition, notice may be given by mail, by delivery of the notice to each unit in the development, by newsletter or similar means of communication, or, with the consent of the member, by electronic means. (See Notice of Meetings ) Also see Notice of Adjourned Meetings . Voting in Executive Session Boards can vote on matters in&nbsp;executive session. They are not required to convene in an open meeting to cast their votes. For example, if a board meets with the association&#39;s attorney to discuss a pending mediation and authorizes a settlement at a certain dollar amount, the vote should be done privately. To require that this vote be done in an open meeting would make negotiations impossible since the board&#39;s negotiating position would be published to the entire community. As the Court of Appeals noted: It is no secret that crowds cannot keep them [secrets]. . . . &quot;[o]ne can only imagine the sleepless nights an attorney and the Board of Directors may incur if privileged information is placed in the hands of hundreds of homeowners who may not all have the same goals in mind.&quot; ( Smith v. Laguna Sur Villas ) Executive Session Minutes An&nbsp;executive session meeting&nbsp;is a proceeding of the board of directors. California law requires that boards keep minutes of their executive sessions. &quot;Each corporation shall keep minutes of the proceedings of its . . . board . . .&quot; ( Corp. Code &sect; 8320(a)(2) ) Such minutes are also referenced in various places in the Davis-Stirling Act. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4950(a) ,&nbsp; &sect; 5200(a)(8) ,&nbsp; &sect; 5215(a)(5)(D) )&nbsp;In addition, they must generally note their sessions in the minutes of the next open meeting of the board. The board&#39;s actions are then generally noted in the&nbsp;minutes&nbsp;of the next open meeting (such as: &quot;The board discussed issues related to the pending mediation.&quot;). ( Civ. Code &sect; 4935(e) ) Content of Minutes . &nbsp;Executive session minutes should reflect the deliberation and reasoning behind actions taken by the board in executive session. For example, if the board gave the manager a warning, the minutes should reflect what occurred. The minutes might state that &quot;The Board expressed dissatisfaction with the manager&#39;s performance and gave the manager a written warning that failure to resolve tardiness and absenteeism would result in her dismissal. The board voted not to renew the&nbsp; manager&#39;s one-year contract and made the manager&#39;s employment at-will.&quot;&nbsp; Approval of Minutes . Executive session minutes may be approved at the board&#39;s next open meeting or executive session. However, the risk with open-meeting approvals is that the board may need to discuss corrections or revisions to the minutes, which could result in the disclosure of confidences and/or waiver of&nbsp; attorney-client privilege . Accordingly, discussion of any changes to executive session minutes should take place in executive session. No Distribution and No Right to Inspect . &nbsp;Because the Legislature deemed the subject matter of executive session meetings confidential and closed the meetings to the membership, the minutes of executive sessions are NOT reviewable by the membership. Executive session minutes are kept separate from open meeting minutes, are not distributed to the membership, and are not available for review and copying by the membership. Minutes May Be Discoverable Although executive session minutes are confidential, they are not necessarily privileged, meaning they are discoverable in litigation. The Davis-Stirling Act does not address the issue of litigation discovery.&nbsp; In general, once litigation has been initiated, any matter may be discoverable if it is relevant to the subject matter of the litigation and not privileged. ( Code Civ. Proc. &sect; 2017.010 )&nbsp; Redacting . Any privileged information, as well as information reasonably likely to compromise the privacy of an individual member of the association, can be&nbsp; redacted .&nbsp;Associations may withhold or redact information that is &ldquo;subject to&nbsp; attorney-client privilege &nbsp;or relating to litigation in which the association is or may become involved&rdquo; ( Civ. Code 5215(a)(3) ); &ldquo;[t]he release of the information is reasonably likely to compromise the privacy of an individual member of the association&rdquo; ( Civ. Code 5215(a)(4) ); or contains records of money received by the association, not from assessments, disciplinary actions, collection activities, or member payment plans, any person&rsquo;s personal information (e.g., social security numbers, credit card numbers, bank information, etc.), or &ldquo;[m]inutes and other information from executive sessions of the board&rdquo; ( Civ. Code 5215(a)(5)(A)-(D) ) Privacy . While the right to privacy is not absolute, courts balance the interests of each side in obtaining or protecting the information, consider the purpose of the information sought, the effect the disclosure will have on the parties, the nature of the objections, and the availability of alternative, less intrusive means for obtaining the requested information. ( Hooser v. Sup. Ct . (2000), 84 Cal.App.4th 997, 1005) The more sensitive the nature of the personal information sought, the greater the showing of need required before disclosure will be permitted. ( Hooser , 84 Cal.App.4th at 1004) Recorded Meetings . Boards should not record their executive sessions (or should dispose of the recordings once minutes have been prepared). Electronic recordings may be subject to&nbsp; a subpoena &nbsp;in future litigation. If the board has recorded its meetings and reasonably believes those recordings will be subpoenaed in a pending legal action, the recordings must be preserved. Draft Minutes . Keeping&nbsp;executive session minutes&nbsp;in draft form does not shield them from discovery. If the association is sued and the plaintiff&nbsp; subpoenas &nbsp;all documents related to executive sessions, boards must produce them,&nbsp;whether in draft or final form, signed or unsigned. Boards should always prepare executive session minutes with an eye to how they would sound to a jury if read aloud in open court. Recommendation : Boards should make sure their executive session minutes are accurate and appropriate since they could, at some point, be read aloud in open court. In addition, litigation discovery is complicated, and associations should work closely with their litigation counsel regarding any document requests made in a lawsuit. Disclosed in Open Meeting Minutes Even though members do not have the right to attend executive sessions, boards must keep members informed about the general nature of the business conducted in their executive sessions. The minutes of the following open board meeting must generally reflect the board&#39;s executive session: &quot;Any matter discussed in executive session shall be generally noted in the minutes of the immediately following meeting that is open to the entire membership.&quot; ( Civ. Code &sect; 4935(e) ) ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login