URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/E/Exclusive-Use-Area

Exclusive Use Area You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME E Exclusive Use Area Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings EXCLUSIVE USE COMMON AREA Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Common Areas Exclusive Use Common Areas Reciprocal Easements Partitioning Common Areas Adverse Possession Exclusive Use Common Area Defined In a condominium association, exclusive use common area (EUCA), sometimes referred to as &quot; restricted common area &quot; or &quot;limited common element,&quot; is a subset of common area. &ldquo;Exclusive use common area means a portion of the common area . . .&rdquo; ( Civ. Code &sect; 4145(a) ) EUCAs are those common areas outside the owner&#39;s separate interest that are for the exclusive use of that owner. 1. CC&amp;Rs . Newer CC&amp;Rs specify areas for owners&#39; exclusive use, such as balconies, patios, storage areas, parking spaces, plumbing, electrical, etc. Older documents (pre-1985) normally do not use the term. Sometimes, even when the term is used, maintenance responsibilities are unclear. 2. Condominium Plan . The association&#39;s condominium plan typically designates areas, such as balconies and parking spaces, set aside for an owner&#39;s exclusive use. 3. Davis-Stirling Act . The Davis-Stirling Act contains a default definition of exclusive use common areas if none is found in the CC&amp;Rs or condominium plan. Civil Code &sect; 4145 defines the following as exclusive use common areas: shutters, awnings, window boxes doorsteps [a step or series of steps leading to the outer door of a house], stoops [a porch with stairs], porches [a covered area extending from a door] balconies and patios exterior doors, door frames, and hardware screens and windows fixtures designed to serve a single interest&nbsp;but existing outside the boundaries of the separate interest telephone wiring Granting Exclusive Use of Common Area Membership Approval . Unless the association&#39;s governing documents specify a different percentage, giving an owner exclusive use of any portion of the common areas requires the approval of 67% of the membership. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4600(a) ) When presenting it for a vote, the board must specify (i) whether the association will receive any monetary consideration for the grant and (ii) whether the association or the transferee will be responsible for providing any insurance coverage for exclusive use of the common area. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4600(c) ) Owner Statute of Limitations . If a board grants exclusive use of the common areas to an individual without membership approval (and none of the exceptions apply), owners can bring an action in court to reverse the approval. Owners have one year from the date the cause of action accrues to file a complaint.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 4605(a) ) If the owner is successful, penalties and attorneys&#39; fees may be awarded against the association. If, however, the association is the prevailing party, it cannot recover any costs unless the court finds the action to be frivolous, unreasonable , or without foundation. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4605(b) ) Exceptions to Membership Approval . There are limited exceptions to the above requirement. Unless the governing documents provide otherwise, the board may grant exclusive use&nbsp;to a portion of the common area without membership approval for reasons described in Civil Code &sect; 4600(b) . A reconveyance of all or any portion of that common area to the subdivider to enable the continuation of development that is in substantial conformance with a detailed plan of phased development submitted to the Real Estate Commissioner with the application for a public report. Any grant of exclusive use that is in substantial conformance with a detailed plan of phased development submitted to the Real Estate Commissioner with the application for a public report or in accordance with the governing documents approved by the Real Estate Commissioner. To eliminate or correct engineering errors in documents recorded with the county recorder or on file with a public agency or utility company. To eliminate or correct encroachments due to errors in the construction of any improvements. To permit changes in the plan of development submitted to the Real Estate Commissioner in circumstances where the changes are the result of topography, obstruction, hardship, aesthetic considerations, or environmental conditions. To fulfill the requirement of a public agency. To transfer the burden of management and maintenance of any common area that is generally inaccessible and not of general use to the membership at large of the association. To accommodate a disability . To assign a parking space, storage unit, or other amenity that is designated in the declaration for assignment, but is not assigned by the declaration to a specific separate interest. To install and use an electric vehicle charging station in an owner&rsquo;s garage or a designated parking space that meets the requirements of &nbsp; Section 4745 , where the installation or use of the charging station requires reasonable access through&nbsp;or across&nbsp;the common area for utility lines or meters. To install and use an electric vehicle charging station through a license granted by an association under Section 4745 . To comply with governing law. Procedure for Board Approval . Any request for exclusive use of any portion of the common areas should be listed in the board&#39;s posted open meeting agenda so the membership is on notice of the request. Any discussion and vote by the board should be done in an open meeting. Before granting any approvals, the board should make a finding, which is recorded in the minutes of the meeting, that one of the above exceptions applies and what facts support the finding. Maintenance Issues . If the board or membership votes to allow an owner to have exclusive use of a portion of the common area, the approval should be conditional on the owner signing a recordable agreement obligating the owner to insure and maintain the property. This will put all future owners on notice of their obligation. The board should also consider putting an indemnity provision in the agreement. CC&amp;R Easement . If the CC&amp;Rs provide for an exclusive easement for a private roadway for one owner to cross over the lot of a neighboring owner to reach his landlocked unit, the easement is enforceable. ( Gray v. McCormick ) Homeowner Maintenance Covenants Associations should record a maintenance covenant against individual properties whenever an owner is granted exclusive use of a common area, makes external alterations to a condominium, or installs an electric vehicle charging station. The covenant contains the owner&#39;s maintenance obligations, holds the association harmless, addresses damage issues, and indemnifies the association. It is then signed by the owner and recorded by the association. Doing so creates a permanent record and informs all future property owners of their obligations.&nbsp; Maintenance Responsibilities Older CC&amp;Rs frequently fail to properly address the maintenance responsibilities of exclusive use common areas. This deficiency can be cured by amending or restating the CC&amp;Rs and by creating a maintenance chart . ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login