URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/E/Electric-Vehicle-Charging-Stations

Electric Vehicle Charging Stations You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME E Electric Vehicle Charging Stations Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Rules &amp; Regulations Renters Pets Daycare, Drones, Flags Vehicles Clubhouse, Gym, Pool Nuisance Issues Clotheslines, Gardens, Turf &nbsp; Parking&nbsp; and Towing EV Charging Stations Traffic&nbsp; Violations Trucks&nbsp;and RVs Scooters and E-Bikes Speed&nbsp;Bumps HOA - Charging Station Requirements Beginning January 1, 2012, any restriction that prohibits or restricts the installation or use of an electric vehicle (&quot;EV&quot;) charging station in a common interest development is void and unenforceable. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4745(a) ) If approval is required for the installation or use of an EV charging station, the application must be processed and approved in the same manner as any other architectural application and not willfully avoided or delayed. Approval or denial of the application must be in writing. If an application is not denied in writing within 60 days from receipt of the application, the application shall be deemed approved unless that delay results from a reasonable request for additional information. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4745(e) ) Restrictions and Expenses . Associations may impose reasonable restrictions on EV charging stations, provided those restrictions do not significantly increase the cost of the station or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4745(b)(2) ) Boards can grant exclusive use of common areas to members who run utility lines and install meters in the common areas for charging stations.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 4600(b)(3)(H) ) All costs associated with the installation are at the requesting owner&rsquo;s expense. If installation of a charging station is impossible or unreasonably expensive, an owner can install it in the common area. Doing so requires a license agreement between the owner and the association.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 4745(g) )&nbsp;Neither the Davis-Stirling Act nor case law offers a guide for determining what is &ldquo;unreasonably expensive.&rdquo; A&nbsp;starting point would be to compare the proposed installation cost with the installation cost if located at a different feasible location within the development. Giving an EV owner a parking space closer to an existing electric panel may benefit the member, but at what cost to future EV owners?&nbsp; Also, most electrical panels in common areas do not provide sufficient power for EV charging, so upgrades are necessary to support charging stations.&nbsp;Rather than responding ad hoc to members&rsquo; requests to install charging stations, associations should develop a comprehensive plan for electrical upgrades to allow owners to install charging stations in their parking spaces. Owner - Charging Station Requirements If an owner wants to install an EV charging station in a common area or an exclusive use common area (his parking space), he/she must meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by state and local authorities as well as all other applicable zoning, land use or other ordinances, or land use permits. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4745(c) ) In addition, the owner&nbsp;must obtain HOA approval and agree in writing to the following ( Civ. Code &sect; 4745(f)(1) ): Architectural Standards. Comply with the association&#39;s architectural standards . Licensed Contractor. Use a licensed contractor to install the station. Insurance. Within 14 days of approval, provide a certificate of insurance that names the common interest development as an additional insured under the homeowner&#39;s insurance policy. Installation Costs . Pay for the cost of installing the charging station. Utility Costs. Pay for electricity usage associated with the station. Duties &amp; Liability . The owner and each successive owner of the EV charging station is responsible for all of the following ( Civ. Code &sect; 4745(f)(2 )) : Damage . Damage to the station, common areas, exclusive common areas, or adjacent units resulting from the installation, maintenance, repair, removal, or replacement of the station. Maintenance . Maintenance, removal, repair, and replacement of the electric vehicle charging station until it has been removed from the common area or exclusive use common area. Electricity . Electricity associated with the station. Disclosure . Disclosing the EV charging station to buyers and the related responsibilities of the homeowner. Insurance . Maintain a liability coverage policy. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4745(f)(3) ) EV Charger Insurance Beginning January 1, 2011, EV owners with charging stations were required to carry insurance and name the association as additional insured. Effective January 1, 2026, owners are no longer required to name the association as additional insured. They are still required to maintain a liability coverge policy. In addition, the owner that installed the charging station and each successor owner must provide the&nbsp;association with a certificate of insurance annually thereafter.&nbsp; ( Civ. Code &sect; 4745(f)(3) ) An owner is not required to maintain a liability coverage policy for an existing National Electrical Manufacturers Association standard alternating current power plug. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4745(f)(4) ) &quot;Public&quot; Charging Stations Associations and homeowners have the authority to install a charging station in the common area for the use of all members. It gives authority to associations to develop rules for using &quot;public&quot; charging stations. It allows associations to create new parking spaces where none previously existed to facilitate their installation. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4745(h) )&nbsp;Owners may install &quot;private&quot; charging stations in the common areas, but only if installing them in an owner&#39;s exclusive use common area is impossible or unreasonably expensive. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4745(g) ) An association may create a new parking space where one did not previously exist to facilitate the installation of an electric vehicle charging station. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4745(i) ) Recommendation : Whenever an owner installs an EV Charging Station, a maintenance covenant signed by the owner should be recorded, putting future owners on notice of their obligation to maintain the charging station and carry proper insurance. This is important since future owners might not have an electric vehicle. It also satisfies the requirements found in Civil Code &sect; 4745(f)(2)(D) to disclose to prospective buyers the existence of the charging station and the related responsibilities of the owner. Insurance . When the EV statute was adopted in 2011 (as Civ. Code &sect; 1353.9), it contained language in two places requiring owners to name the association as additional insured: sections (f)(1)(C) and (f)(3). In 2018, the statute (now Civ. Code 4745) was amended to remove the dollar amount of the insurance ($1 million) and the additional insured requirement from section (f)(3). The Legislature left in place in section (f)(1)(C) the requirement that owners name the association as an additional insured &quot;in the amount outlined in paragraph (3).&quot;&nbsp; Since the dollar amount was removed from (f)(3), some believe that owners are no longer required to name the association as additional insured even though it is still found in&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 4745(f)(1)(C) . This issue will likely generate greater interest as more EV charging stations are installed in parking structures. The reason is electrical fires. E-Fires on the Rise Fires from lithium-ion batteries in electric vehicles are still low but on the rise. The problem with EV fires is that they burn faster and hotter &nbsp;than combustion engine fires and release more toxic fumes.&nbsp;Typically, a&nbsp;gas-powered vehicle burns at 1,500 degrees Fahrenheit, while&nbsp;an EV fire burns at 5,000 degrees.&nbsp;Because EV fires are so intense, they can cause structural damage to buildings.&nbsp; Also, EV fires are extremely difficult to put out, especially inside parking structures where their proximity to other vehicles can create a chain reaction. It takes about 2,000 gallons of water to extinguish a gas-powered vehicle fire; an EV fire can take 20,000 gallons or more.&nbsp;According to testimony in Congressional hearings, &quot;extinguishing lithium-ion battery fires has proven difficult for fire services across the country. For instance, in 2021, after a Tesla caught fire following a crash in a Houston suburb, eight firefighters spent over seven hours and 28,000 gallons of water, an amount the department normally uses in a month, before the fire was fully extinguished. The reality is that some lithium-ion battery fires can reignite hours later, some even days later, and traditional fire extinguishing methods do not always work on them.&quot; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login