URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/E/Elevated-Structure-Inspections-SB-326-Balconies-Stairs

Elevated Structure Inspections SB 326 - Balconies & Stairs You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME E Elevated Structure Inspections SB 326 - Balconies & Stairs Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings SB 326 ELEVATED ELEMENTS-BALCONY INSPECTIONS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Maintenance Pest Control Plumbing Balcony Inspections Asbestos &amp; Mold Reserves Balcony Inspections Inspection Companies Maintenance &amp; Repairs Stair&nbsp; Inspections Elevated Element Inspections Required Beginning January 1, 2020, SB 326&nbsp;requires condominium developments with three or more units per building have its elevated load-bearing structures supported substantially by wood inspected. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5551(l)) The inspector must submit a report to the board, providing the structures&#39; physical condition, remaining useful life, and associated waterproofing systems. The statute does not change who is responsible for&nbsp;maintaining, repairing, and&nbsp;replacing balconies or other elevated structures. It imposes inspection and repair obligations on HOAs regarding balconies and/or elevated structures that associations must repair and&nbsp;replace. Inspectors will be looking primarily for dry rot and termite damage. Dry Rot Damage . The term &quot;dry rot&quot; is a misnomer. Wood does not rot when it is dry. For decay to occur, moisture must be present for fungi to feed on wood. Like viruses and bacteria, fungal spores are microscopic and travel through the air. The spores act as seeds that grow when they land on moist wood products. They feed on the wood&#39;s cellulose when they plant themselves into wood. Cellulose is what gives wood its strength. As the fungi consume cellulose, the wood weakens.&nbsp;Fungi (like termites) spread throughout a structure as they feed on wood. As a result, dry rot can be difficult to treat. To stop the destruction, all decayed wood and fungi must be removed. The longer it goes untreated, the weaker the wood becomes until it collapses without warning. Condominiums Subject to Inspections The inspection requirement&nbsp;does not apply to planned developments but only to elevated structures in condominium developments. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5551(b)(1) ) Townhouse Balconies . A townhouse is a form of construction, not a form of ownership. A townhouse can be defined as a condominium or a separate interest in a planned development. If the townhouse is a condominium, the responsibility for balconies will depend on how a condominium unit is defined. If the unit&#39;s boundaries are the unfinished surfaces of the interior walls, ceilings, and floors, the townhouse structure is owned in common by the membership. That makes the association responsible for repairing and replacing the structure unless the CC&amp;Rs clearly state otherwise. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4775 ) If a unit&#39;s boundaries are defined as extending to the exterior surfaces of the townhouse, the structure becomes part of the unit and is the homeowner&#39;s responsibility unless the governing documents state otherwise. NOTE: Boards should have their documents reviewed by legal counsel.&nbsp;If townhouses are defined as a planned development, homeowners own the structure and the lot upon which they were built. That means homeowners are responsible for their balconies. Stock Coops &amp; Community Apartments . Stock cooperatives and community apartments are both forms of common interest developments governed by the Davis-Stirling Act. Civil Code &sect; 5551(l) states that inspections of elevated wooden structures apply to multi-family structures with three or more units. This would seem to apply to stock co-ops and community apartment projects. However, the statute also seems to limit its requirements to condominium projects. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5551(b)(1) ) If so, stock cooperatives and community apartments with elevated structures are not required to inspect their structures. Recommendation . Because of the anomaly in the statute, stock cooperatives, and community apartment projects with multi-family structures with three or more units should get an opinion from legal counsel on how best to proceed. The safer course of action is to inspect and repair elevated structures. Doing so protects residents and minimizes potential litigation and judgments against the association. Exterior Elevated Elements Defined Required inspections apply to load-bearing components and associated waterproofing systems. &quot;Load-bearing&quot; means (i) those components that extend beyond the exterior walls of the building to deliver structural loads to the building from decks, balconies, stairways , walkways, and their railings, (ii) that have a walking surface more than six feet above ground level, (iii) that are designed for human occupancy or use, and (iv) are supported in whole or in substantial part by wood or wood-based products. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5551(a)(3) ) #1 Cantilevered Balconies #2 Balcony on Posts &nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp; #3 Balcony over Garage #4 Balcony over Garage &nbsp; #5 Stairs &amp; Landings &nbsp; #6 Elevated Walkways #7 &nbsp;Juliette Balcony #8 &nbsp; Highrise Concrete Balconies #9 Balcony Flush with Building Thank you to Dennis Brooks of Design Build Associates for the photos. Illustrations . On the right side of the screen are examples of different configurations of elevated structures needing inspection. Cantilevered balconies constructed of wood must be inspected. Balconies supported by wood posts require inspection. Balconies supported by the primary structure do not require inspection since they cannot collapse. Balcony railings, however, can give way and should be inspected and included in the association&#39;s reserve study. Balconies partly supported by the structure and partly cantilevered require inspection. Exterior stairs and landings attached to wood require inspection. (See information about&nbsp; Stair&nbsp;Inspections and Maintenance .) Elevated walkways supported by wood structures must be inspected. Juliette balconies are decorative and do not meet inspection requirements. However, they should be inspected if they are attached to wood and a person can lean against them.&nbsp; Balconies made entirely of concrete and steel do not require inspection. Balconies flush with the building.&nbsp; NOTE : Elevated structures that do not require inspection under Civil Code &sect; 5551 still require a diligent visual inspection for purposes of an association&#39;s 3-year cycle of inspections for their reserve study. This includes concrete balconies. Balcony Railings The balcony, walkway, and stair railings must also be inspected to see if they are attached to wood or wood products. Even&nbsp;if a balcony does not extend beyond the exterior walls, the railings could fail, causing severe injuries or death. If the load of the railing transfers to the deck, the deck should be inspected. See photos #3, #7, and #9 as examples where railings and decks should be inspected, even if the balconies do not fall under inspection requirements. Picture #9 . This picture is interesting because the&nbsp;balconies do not extend away from the building.&nbsp;Even though they are flush with the building, each is more than six feet above the one below it. Also, the railings are attached to wood products and could fail, sending someone falling to their death. Arguably, they might not fall under the statute; even so,&nbsp;they should be inspected. Out of Code Railings. If the railings no longer meet code, i.e., the spacing between bars is more than 4 inches, and the railing height is less than 42&nbsp;inches, the railings must be brought up to code whenever they are replaced.&nbsp;If the supporting wood is dry rotted, which requires replacement of the railings, they need to be brought up to code.&nbsp;If balconies do not require any repairs, the railings are normally grandfathered. Even so, an association&#39;s insurance carrier may require railings on elevated structures (balconies, decks, and walkways) and fences around pools to be brought up to code.&nbsp; Waterproofing Systems Water intrusion into balconies, decks, and other elevated structures is the primary factor causing damage to the wood that supports those structures. It has led to the collapse of many structures around the nation, including the Berkeley balcony that killed six college students and seriously injured seven others. Water intrusion can quickly lead to dry rot and the loss of structural integrity.&nbsp;Without moisture, fungi cannot grow; thus, keeping all waterproofing systems well-maintained is important. That is why the Davis-Stirling Act requires thoroughly inspecting waterproofing components such as flashings, membranes, coatings, and sealants. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5551(a)(1) ) Inspection Reports Elevated structures must be inspected at least once every nine years. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5551(b)(1) ) Inspectors . The inspections must be conducted by a licensed structural engineer, architect, or civil engineer. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5551(b)(1) ) The inspector must inspect a sufficient number of units to provide 95 percent confidence that the results from the sample reflect the whole, with a margin of error of no greater than plus or minus 5 percent. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5551(a)(4) ) The association&#39;s reserve study professional should be notified when the inspection occurs since the result could impact the cost allocations for particular line items in the study.&nbsp;The first page of the report must include the following information: &nbsp; &nbsp; Date of inspection &nbsp; &nbsp; Total number of units &nbsp; &nbsp; Total number of units with EEEs &nbsp; &nbsp; Total number of EEEs in the project &nbsp; &nbsp; Total number of EEEs inspected &nbsp; &nbsp; Total number of inspected EEEs that pose a safety threat and the number of affected units &nbsp; &nbsp; The inspector&#39;s certification Inspection reports must be made available for two inspection cycles, i.e., eighteen (18) years , and made available for review by members and prospective purchasers.&nbsp; Borescopes . Inspectors can use the least intrusive method necessary to examine load-bearing components, including visual observation in conjunction with moisture meters, borescopes, and infrared technology. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5551(a)(5) ) The advantage of a borescope is that only small holes are drilled into the stucco, which are easily patched. However, it is sometimes difficult for the scope to see signs of water infiltration and framing deterioration. Often, the better approach is to open the underside of balconies so an inspector can easily see the structural elements. Some inspectors use both methods, depending on the particular project and the condition of the structures. Inspection Costs . The statue requires a 95% confidence level, which will be expensive. The total cost will depend on the number of elevated structures inspected. Inspector&#39;s Report . The inspector must submit a report to the board of directors specifying the current physical condition and remaining useful life of the load-bearing components and associated waterproofing systems and whether they are an immediate threat to the health and safety of residents. The report must also include recommendations for any necessary repairs. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5551(e) ) The association must keep the report for at least two inspection cycles (18 years). ( Civ. Code &sect; 5551(i) ) Immediate Threat to Safety . If the inspector finds that the exterior elevated element poses an immediate threat to the safety of the occupants, the inspector must submit the report to the board immediately and to the local code enforcement agency within 15 days of completion of the report. The association must take preventive measures immediately upon receiving the report, including preventing occupant access to the exterior elevated element until repairs have been inspected and approved by the local enforcement agency. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5551(g) )&nbsp;Local enforcement can force immediate repairs, even if it requires an emergency special assessment .&nbsp; Concrete Balconies Even though the elevated structure statute does not apply to concrete and steel balconies, they should still be inspected and included in an association&#39;s reserve study. This includes waterproofing and railings.&nbsp;Concrete is porous, and any water migrating into the structure can cause the reinforcing steel to rust. This causes the metal to expand, which cracks the concrete and leads to spalling (concrete breaking off in fragments). Regular maintenance of the waterproofing can avoid expensive concrete repairs down the road. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login