URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/E/Election-Campaigning

Election Campaigning You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME E Election Campaigning Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings ELECTION CAMPAIGNING Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Director Elections Campaigning Director Term of Office Campaigning Free Speech Signs, Posters and Flyers Social Media Campaigning by Candidates Directors Can Campaign . All candidates, board members, and homeowners have the right to campaign for and against candidates at their own expense. They can support or oppose candidates, amendments, assessments, etc. Membership List . Candidates have the right to receive a copy of the&nbsp; membership list when campaigning for the board.&nbsp; Campaign Liability . Candidates shall, by statute, indemnify and hold the corporation, its agents, officers, directors, and employees, and hold&nbsp;them harmless from all demands, costs, including reasonable legal fees and expenses, claims, damages, and causes of action arising out of such material or any such mailing or publication. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7525 ) Candidates&#39; Forum Some associations schedule a &quot;Meet the Candidates&quot; forum either before or shortly after the ballots are mailed to the members. This does not violate the restriction on using association funds for campaign purposes since the forum is not an advocacy for any particular candidate but, rather, an opportunity for members to meet all candidates and hear their position on issues facing the community. Forum Optional . The law does not require a &quot;Meet the Candidates&quot; meeting, and nominees are not required to campaign for office. As a result, associations may dispense with the forum if the election is uncontested. In addition, associations may want to amend their documents to dispense with balloting in&nbsp; uncontested elections . If the association chooses not to host a forum, there is nothing preventing the candidates from organizing one and reserving a common area&nbsp;meeting place&nbsp;at no cost to the candidates. Format of the Forum . In the event a forum is held, the format is entirely up to the hosting party. The following formats are common: Statements Only . In this format, the association serves finger foods or wine and cheese, and each candidate makes a statement (or short speech) explaining why members should vote for them. Once finished, the candidates mingle with members and answer questions. This keeps everything casual and friendly. &nbsp; Questions and Answers . This format allows each candidate to make a statement as to why members should vote for them and then takes questions from the audience. Sometimes, this can become heated and contentious. &nbsp; Written Questions Only . Some associations will take written questions from the audience and then have each candidate give a brief response to avoid verbal jousting between candidates and members. Ballot Issues &quot;Sample&quot; Ballots .&nbsp; In addition, anyone can send campaign materials, including a sample ballot premarked with their recommended votes. If they send a campaign ballot, the sender must be clear that it cannot be used in place of the official ballot . To avoid any confusion, the ballot should have &quot; SAMPLE &quot; stamped across it. If members use campaign ballots in place of official ballots, they will be voided by the Inspectors of Election. Soliciting Ballots . Although owners may solicit proxies, it is improper to solicit ballots, to mark other owners&#39; ballots, or to engage in electioneering when a voter is casting a ballot. Diverting Ballots . Homeowners campaigning for or against special assessments, election of directors, removal of directors, or the like cannot induce owners to divert ballots away from the Inspectors of Election. The Election Code and the Davis-Stirling Act require that voters&nbsp;mail or deliver their ballots in person to election officials. ( Elections Code &sect; 3017 ,&nbsp; Civ. Code &sect; 5115 ) Canvassing, Petitioning, and Meetings Canvassing . Associations cannot prohibit members or residents from canvassing or petitioning (1) members, (2) the association&rsquo;s board, and (3) residents to participate in permitted activities (assembling, meeting, speaking with public figures, etc.). ( Civ. Code &sect; 4515(b)(4) ) Distributing Flyers . Members cannot be prohibited from distributing or circulating, without permission, information about (1) CID living, (2) association elections, (3) legislation, (4) election to public office, (5) the initiative, referendum, or recall processes, or (6) other issues of concern to members and residents. This is the broadest and most overreaching portion of the new law. Without permission, the scope of information that may be distributed is unlimited. It only needs to be any matter that concerns a member or resident. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4515(b)(5) ) Meeting Space .&nbsp; Associations must ensure access to the common area meeting space, if any exists, during a campaign, at no cost, to all candidates, including those who are not incumbents, and to all members advocating a point of view, including those not endorsed by the board, for purposes reasonably related to the election. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(a)(2) ) Penalties for Violations . Members or residents who are prevented from engaging in activities protected by this new law may seek injunctive relief and imposition of a civil penalty of up to $500 in civil or&nbsp; small claims court . ( Civ. Code &sect; 4515(d) ) Equal Access to Association Media If any candidate, member, or director advocating a point of view using the association&#39;s media (such as newsletters and internet websites) during a campaign for purposes that are reasonably related to the election, the association must provide equal access to all candidates and members advocating a point of view on the issue. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(a) ) ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login