URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/E/Balcony-Maintenance-Repairs

Balcony Maintenance & Repairs You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME E Balcony Maintenance & Repairs Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings BALCONY MAINTENANCE & REPAIRS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Maintenance Pest Control Plumbing Balcony Inspections Asbestos &amp; Mold Reserves Balcony Inspections Inspection Companies Maintenance &amp; Repairs Stair&nbsp; Inspections Balcony Maintenance &amp; Repairs Waterproofing membranes will eventually become worn and damaged. Damage occurs naturally from sunlight during the summer and rains in the winter. Problem signs to look for include: bubbling of the deck surface, cracks in the membrane, soft spots in the deck that sag when stepped on, flashing that is pulling away from the wall, water that does not flow to the drains. Damage to Decks . In addition, owners can cause premature failure by moving heavy items across the surface, such as large plant-filled pots, sharp legs on chairs and tables, etc. Charcoal grills should also be prohibited--in addition to being fire hazards and creating nuisance smoke, any hot coals dropped onto the surface will burn through the waterproofing membrane. Decks should be kept clean since sand and grit, when walked on, will grind into the surface and damage the waterproofing. Tile Is Not a Waterproofing System .&nbsp; Tile and the grout used to install it are porous. As a result, water will become trapped between these materials and the waterproofing membrane underneath. This will void the waterproofing manufacturer&#39;s warranty and accelerate the breakdown of the waterproofing materials. The resultant water seepage into the balcony structure will lead to wood rot and attract termites. Frequently, the damage is undetectable. Sometimes, the first sign of trouble is when the owner walks onto the deck and his/her foot goes through the flooring material. The structural repairs that follow are quite costly. Drainage . Another problem caused by tile is that it reduces the space between the top of the deck surface and the threshold of the sliding glass door. That means heavy rain that overwhelms balcony drains will quickly spill over the threshold into the owner&#39;s unit and the unit below. In addition, tile can cover the weep screed in the stucco, thereby blocking drainage from the walls, which leads&nbsp;to dry rot and mold in the walls. Recorded Covenant . &nbsp;If owners are allowed to install tile on their balconies, minimum standards need to be established by the board. They must be in writing and made part of the association&#39;s Architectural Standards or Rules &amp; Regulations. In addition, the owner should sign a recordable covenant obligating the current owner and all future owners to maintain the balcony deck and any damage that may result. Liability for Damage to Balconies QUESTION :&nbsp;One of the homeowners put huge potted plants on his balcony. If water eventually weakens the balcony, who is responsible for repairing it? ANSWER : The structural elements of the balcony are almost always the association&#39;s responsibility. The only exception I&#39;ve seen is when the balcony is added to the building by the unit owner (with the association&#39;s permission). When that happens, we require the owner to sign a&nbsp;recordable covenant&nbsp;that makes him/her responsible for the repair and maintenance of the balcony structure. Balcony Surface . &nbsp; Regarding the balcony surface, your governing documents control (assuming they address the issue). If the association is responsible for waterproofing the surface, the board should ensure it keeps everything waterproofed. More often than not, governing documents are unclear or silent on the issue of deck maintenance. In that case, the Davis-Stirling Act resolves the ambiguity by stating that &quot;Unless otherwise provided in the [CC&amp;Rs] . . . the owner of each separate interest is responsible for maintaining . . . any exclusive use common area&nbsp; appurtenant to the separate interest . ( Civ. Code &sect; 4775 ) That means owners are responsible for maintaining their balcony&#39;s waterproofing surface (which is the norm for most associations). Negligent Maintenance . &nbsp;If an owner tiles the balcony&nbsp;deck or fails to properly maintain the waterproofing, which damages the balcony&#39;s structure, the association could hold the owner responsible. Normally, there are provisions in the CC&amp;Rs that allow associations to charge an owner for the cost of repairing damage caused by their negligence. If the CC&amp;Rs are silent, the Davis-Stirling Act allows boards to impose reimbursement special assessments as a monetary charge and collect it through lien and foreclosure (provided the authority to impose a lien is in the governing documents). ( Civ. Code &sect; 5725 .)&nbsp; Recommendation . &nbsp;Boards should adopt reasonable rules restricting planters and other activities that can damage balconies. Maintenance Rules If owners are responsible for maintaining their decks, guidelines need to be written into the association&#39;s rules to cover the following items: what to look for when inspecting the decks for damage, how to avoid damage to the waterproofing membrane, how often the deck should be resealed (waterproofing products&nbsp; such as Dexotex require recoating every 5 years--sooner if there is heavy usage or damage from patio furniture, etc.), the kinds of waterproofing systems that are acceptable to the association, prohibited deck systems, such as carpet and tile, deck drain maintenance, and deck to-wall flashing maintenance. Confusing Maintenance Duties . Association documents routinely assign maintenance duties between owners and the association. Unfortunately, exclusive use common areas are often left out or muddled. For example, in condominium developments, older CC&amp;Rs are vague or silent regarding balconies. Old Default Provision . To resolve the problem, the Davis-Stirling Act created a default provision that assigned exclusive use maintenance to owners. The Act did not define &quot;maintenance,&quot; but everyone previously understood it to include repairs since most dictionaries define it as such. New Default Provision . Starting January 1, 2017, a new default provision went into effect. Unless an association&#39;s CC&amp;Rs state otherwise, owners continue to be responsible for maintaining their exclusive use areas, but the association will be responsible for repairing and replacing them. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4775(a)(3) ) Structural Elements . Unless the CC&amp;Rs clearly state otherwise, the structural elements of balconies are the responsibility of the association to repair and replace, even when the balcony is described as part of a unit. This is because the ownership of a condominium balcony is generally defined as airspace bounded by the interior planes of the balcony. Thus, the structure remains common area that the association must&nbsp;repair and replace. Inspections . To avoid legal problems, associations should should: Adopt maintenance guidelines that clearly define an owner&#39;s duties for the waterproofing portion of balconies. Those duties must harmonize with their CC&amp;Rs. Create a Maintenance Chart&nbsp;that clearly defines&nbsp;duties. Amend&nbsp;Your&nbsp;CC&amp;Rs&nbsp;if they are&nbsp;unclear about who maintains the waterproofing elements on your balconies. Each association must decide whether it wants the association to maintain deck coatings or assign that task to owners.&nbsp;That decision must be clearly outlined in the CC&amp;Rs. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login