URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/E/Stair-Inspection-Maintenance

Stair Inspection & Maintenance You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME E Stair Inspection & Maintenance Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings STAIR INSPECTION & MAINTENANCE Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Maintenance Pest Control Plumbing Balcony Inspections Asbestos &amp; Mold Reserves Balcony Inspections Inspection Companies Maintenance &amp; Repairs Stair&nbsp; Inspections Stair Inspections and Maintenance Reasons for Failure . In most cases, it takes 10 to 20 years for the failure of a stair to occur. Failure is most often due to exposure to rain and sun and accelerated by poor maintenance or poor design. Failure can result in loose stair treads which can lead to falls or water intrusion and dry rotted wood. Building Codes . Depending on the extent of the repair, associations may be required to bring the stair into compliance with current code. Current code does not allow stairs to be as steep or narrow as they once were. Definitions . The following definitions apply to stairs. Guardrail : The guardrail is designed to prevent falls from stairs of decks greater than 30 inches above the ground. Current code requires the guardrail to be no less that 42 inches high (it was 36 inches before) and designed to prevent a 4 inch diameter sphere from passing through it (it was 6 inches before). The current code also requires the guardrail to be strong enough to resist a 200 pound load along the top of the rail. Handrail : The wood or steel tube or rod that ascends with the stairs. Handrails are required by code on both sides of an exterior stair. There are very few exceptions to this code requirement. They are required to be of a specific diameter, shape and distance from the wall or guardrail. They are required to extend past the top and bottom of the stair and to terminate in such a manner that a shirt sleeve or bracelet will not get caught on the handrail. Nosing : Where the riser intersects with the tread. Risers : The vertical space or surface at the back of each tread which separates one tread from the next tread. Sometimes the riser is open meaning an object can pass through it. Sometimes the riser is closed. Closed risers comply with current building codes, open risers do not comply. The risers are to be consistent in height and have a current code limit of no less than 4 inches high and no greater than 7 inches high. Stringer : This is the structural beam (wood or steel) that runs parallel to the treads as they ascend. There are times when there is no visible stringer because it is either embedded in a wall or hidden with finish materials. Treads : The horizontal surface of the stairs that you step on. These can be made of pre-cast concrete (made at a factory), steel, wood or some type of solid (hopefully waterproof) deck coating. The treads are required to be uniform in depth and have a minimum depth of 11 inches to meet current code. PRECAST CONTRETE TREADS AND RISERS The tread and riser are formed out of one piece of pre-cast concrete. PRECAST CONCRETE TREADS&nbsp;AND STEEL STRINGER The concrete tread bolts to the steel angle welded to the steel stringer. If this stair was not under a roof, we would likely see rust where the tread attaches to the steel angle. PRECAST TREADS WITH WOOD STRINGERS This stair does not comply with current codes for tread depth, closed risers, guardrail height or handrail design. WOOD STAIR WITH WATERPROOF COATING The stair framed of wood and coated with a waterproof coating. The stringers are hidden in the stucco coated guardrail walls. STAIR FAILURE Water penetrated the stringer where the steel angle supports the pre-cast concrete tread. Thirty years later there was little wood left to support this stair. The red tape and plastic is the destructive testing holes created to determine the extent of the damage. &nbsp;WOOD ROT&nbsp; The photo&nbsp;above showd extensive decay of the stair stringers and guardrails.&nbsp; &nbsp; NEW STAIR AND TEMPORARY STAIR A new replacement stair is being constructed on the right. A temporary stair which allows ingress and egress for second floor occupants during the construction is located on the left.&nbsp; NEW AND OLD A new stair is on the left and an old stair is on the right. the new stair is wood framed with a waterproof coating. The stair on the right is pre-cast concrete treads connected to stringers covered by the stucco coated guardrails. Quick tips for managing stairs: Stairs with waterproof coating should be inspected annually to confirm the coating has not been compromised by furniture moving or misuse. Pre-cast concrete stairs should be checked with every painting (3 to 5 years depending on your climate) to confirm the treads are tight and the stringers are structurally sound. Be diligent in maintaining the paint where pre-cast concrete treads touch the stringer and where there are exposed fasteners (bolts, screws, etc.). Replacement or repair of treads typically does not require a building permit. With few exceptions we have found that repair or replacement of stair stringers require building permits. Prior permit experience with stair replacement or repairs in one city does not mean that another city will permit the stairs the same way. Although the building code is a statewide code, the building official in each city is the final interpreter of the code. Thank you to Smith Architects for providing information about stairs. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login