URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/F/Fiduciary-Duties-of-California-HOA-Directors

Fiduciary Duties of California HOA Directors You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME F Fiduciary Duties of California HOA Directors Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings FIDUCIARY DUTIES OF HOA BOARD MEMBERS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Boards of Directors Board Meetings Committees Management Board&nbsp;Authority &amp; Duties Fiduciary&nbsp;Duties Ethics Censure Provisional&nbsp; Directors Director&nbsp;Resignations Director Appointments Officers &nbsp; 2-Minute Video Director Fiduciary Duties&nbsp; Fiduciary Duty : A duty to act for someone else&#39;s benefit&nbsp;while subordinating one&#39;s personal interest to that of the other person is the highest standard of duty implied by law (e.g., trustee, guardian). - Black&#39;s Law Dictionary Association Fiduciary Duties . A homeowners association has a fiduciary relationship with the membership as a whole and not to individual member&#39;s interests. ( Frances T. v. Village Green Owners Ass&#39;n &nbsp;(1986) 42 Cal.3d 490,&nbsp;513) [I]n recognition of the increasingly important role played by private homeowners&rsquo; associations&hellip;the courts have recognized that such associations owe a fiduciary duty to their members. ( Cohen v. Kite Hill Community Ass&#39;n &nbsp;(1983) 142 Cal.App.3d. 642, 650-651) Directors of nonprofit corporations such as the Association are fiduciaries who are required to exercise their powers in accordance with the duties imposed by the Corporations Code&hellip;This fiduciary relationship is governed by the statutory standard that requires directors to exercise due care and undivided loyalty for the interests of the corporation.&rdquo; ( Frances T. v. Village Green Owners Ass&#39;n &nbsp;(1986) 42 Cal.3d 490,&nbsp;513) Generally, fiduciary duties owed by a homeowners association to its members are limited to those arising from its governing documents and relevant statutory requirements.&nbsp;( Golden Eagle Land Investment, L.P. v. Rancho Santa Fe Ass&#39;n &nbsp;(2018) 19 Cal.App.5th 399, 425; Ostayan v. Nordhoff Townhomes Homeowners Ass&#39;n, Inc . (2003) 110 Cal.App.4th 120, 129) Director Fiduciary Duties . Board members must act with the utmost good faith and reasonable care to benefit the association and its members. It applies to directors of both incorporated and unincorporated associations. It is well settled that directors of nonprofit corporations are fiduciaries. ( Raven&rsquo;s Cove Townhomes, Inc. v. Knuppe Dev&#39;l Co . (1981) 114 Cal.App.3d 783) This fiduciary relationship is governed by the statutory standard that requires directors to exercise due care and undivided loyalty for the interests of the corporation. ( Francis T. v. Village Green Owners Ass&rsquo;n &nbsp;(1986) 42 Cal.3d 490) In addition to the duty of care, directors owe the association a fiduciary duty of loyalty ( Bancroft-Whitney Co. v. Glen (1966) 64 Cal.2d 327, 345) That means protecting the interests of the association and refraining from doing anything that would injure it. (Id. at 345) Duty of Care (to Investigate) &quot;Due diligence,&quot; or the duty to investigate, is one of the&nbsp;fiduciary duties&nbsp;of directors. Association boards of directors must make reasonable inquiries regarding issues brought before the board. This does not mean directors must personally inspect water leaks or talk to vendors personally &mdash;they can rely on managing agents, committees, or others to gather information for their review and discussion. A director cannot close his eyes to what is going on about him in the conduct of the business of the corporation and have it said that he is exercising&nbsp; business judgment . ( Burt v. Irvine Co ) We hold that where a duly constituted community association board, upon reasonable investigation, in good faith and with regard for the best interests of the community association and its members, exercises discretion within the scope of its authority under relevant statutes, covenants and restrictions to select among means for discharging an obligation to maintain and repair a development&#39;s common areas, courts should defer to the board&#39;s authority and presumed expertise.&nbsp; (Lamden v. La Jolla Shores ) [I]n&nbsp; Lamden, &nbsp;ample evidence demonstrated the association board engaged in the sort of reasoned decisionmaking that merits judicial deference... [p]roof . . . that the investigation has been so restricted in scope, so shallow in execution, or otherwise so&nbsp; pro forma &nbsp;or halfhearted as to constitute a pretext or sham, consistent with the principles underlying the application of the business judgment doctrine, would raise questions of good faith or conceivably fraud which would never be shielded by that doctrine.&#39;&rdquo;].) ( Palm Springs Villas II v. Parth ) The term &quot;under similar circumstances&quot; requires a court to consider the nature and extent of a director&#39;s alleged oversight or mistake in judgment in the context of such factors as the size, complexity and location of activities involved, and to limit the critical assessment of a director&#39;s performance to the time of the action or non-action and thereby avoid the harsher judgments which can be made with the benefit of hindsight ( Gaillard v. Natomas Co. &nbsp;(1989) 208 Cal.App.3d. 1250, 1265) Competent Advice . &nbsp;Boards may rely on the advice of persons they believe to be reliable and competent in the matters being presented. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7231(b) ) This means boards can rely on CPAs for financial and tax issues, attorneys for legal issues, etc. Good faith reliance on the advice of counsel provides a defense even if that counsel&#39;s advice later proves to be legally unsound ( Melorich Builders, Inc. v. Superior Court&nbsp; (1984) 160 Cal.App.3d 931, 936-37) Following is a list of some of the advisors boards commonly rely on: Accountants Attorneys Bankers Consultants (elevators, roofing, architects, engineers, etc.) Insurance brokers/agents Managers Reserve specialists Vendors (landscapers, roofers, plumbers, electricians, etc.) Directors must be diligent and careful in performing the duties they have undertaken. ( Burt v. Irvine Co ) Directors must: Attend and participate in meetings to inform them about the association&#39;s business. Make reasonable inquiries regarding maintenance issues, rules violations, etc. Make decisions . Keep corporate records . Enforce the governing documents . Oversee the association&#39;s finances . Duty of Loyalty In addition to the duty of care, directors and officers owe the association a fiduciary duty of loyalty. (Bancroft-Whitney Co. v. Glen (1966) 64 Cal. 2d 327, 345) That means protecting the interests of the association and refraining from doing anything that would injure it. ( Bancroft-Whitney , supra. at 345.) It includes the following: No Self-Dealing . Directors cannot use their position of trust and confidence to further their private interests. They must act in the association&#39;s best interests even if at the expense of their own interests. This is more than just embezzlement of funds; it includes steering contracts to family members or taking actions that result in personal benefits to the director at the association&#39;s expense. Violation could result in (i) liability for all profits received, (ii) all damages caused by the breach, and (iii) punitive damages .&quot;We note that the duty of undivided loyalty applies when the board of directors of the association considers maintenance and repair contracts, the operating budget, creation of reserve and operating accounts, etc. Thus, [directors] may not make decisions for the association that benefit their own interests at the expense of the association and its members.&quot; ( Raven&#39;s Cove v. Knuppe ) See Director Conflicts of Interest . Duty of Confidentiality . The duty to keep confidential matters confidential falls under the duty of loyalty. Breaching the duty of confidentiality could harm the association, which would be a breach of the Duty of Loyalty.&nbsp; Duty to Preserve Common Areas . Boards must protect, preserve, and enhance the assets of the association. An association&#39;s primary asset is the common areas. Duty to Support Board Decisions . The duty of loyalty can extend to the support of board decisions . Because board members are entrusted with the association&#39;s money and property, they must avoid conflicts of interest . Duty of Confidentiality Board members must keep confidential information confidential.&nbsp;The authority to release information is held by the board as a whole, not by individual directors. Once the information is released, it cannot be taken back. Accordingly, directors who release information without board approval could face significant consequences. Commodity Futures Trading Comm&#39;n v. Weintraub , 471 U.S. 343, 348-49 (1985) (power to waive the corporate attorney-client privilege rests with the corporation&rsquo;s management and is normally exercised by its officers and directors; the managers, of course, must exercise the privilege in a manner consistent with their fiduciary duty to act in the best interests of the corporation and not of themselves as individuals);&nbsp; See&nbsp; People ex. rel. Spitzer v. Greenberg , 50 A.D.3d 195, N.Y.S. 2d 196, 200-01 (2008);&nbsp; See Stewart Equip. Co. v. Gallo , 32&nbsp; N.J. Super.&nbsp; 15 (Law Div. 1954) (The attorney-client privilege applies to a corporation and can only be waived by the corporation; the act of an officer of a corporation is not regarded as the act of the corporation, unless authorized);&nbsp; See Lane v. Sharp Packaging Sys., Inc., &nbsp;2002 WI 28, 251 Wis. 2d 68, 98-99 640 (holding former director could not waive lawyer-client privilege on behalf of corporation.) Executive Session Topics . All matters covered in executive session meetings are confidential .&nbsp; Continuing Duty . While the&nbsp;fiduciary&nbsp;duties of a director or trustee terminate when the director or trustee ends his or her term, the duty to&nbsp;protect&nbsp;and&nbsp;preserve confidential information received during&nbsp;service&nbsp;as a director continues after the director leaves the&nbsp;board. &quot;[While] the&nbsp;fiduciary&nbsp;duties of a director or trustee terminate when the director or trustee ends his or her tour of duty, the duty to&nbsp;protect&nbsp;and&nbsp;preserve confidential information received during&nbsp;service&nbsp;as a director continues after the director leaves the&nbsp;board.&quot; ( In re Mortgage &amp; Realty Trus t (1966) 195 B.R. 740, 750)&nbsp;For most executive session matters, confidentiality should extend indefinitely. It&nbsp;includes personnel matters, an owner&#39;s delinquency payment plan,&nbsp; disciplinary actions , and&nbsp; attorney-client privileged &nbsp;communications. Other Board Duties .&nbsp;A board is obligated to perform a number of other duties in addition to its fiduciary duties. See &quot; Board Authority and Duties .&quot;&nbsp; Drunk Directors Serving wine at board meetings is not illegal, but it could present problems. If directors drink excessively, their&nbsp;judgment will be impaired&nbsp;when making decisions for the association. Also, if they injure themselves on the way back to their residence, claims could be made against the association&#39;s insurance. However, if their drinking is light--one glass of wine, it should be harmless. However, if a director gets drunk or attends meetings already drunk, that is a problem.&nbsp;To avoid personal liability for their actions/decisions, directors must perform their&nbsp;fiduciary duties&nbsp;&quot;with such care, including reasonable inquiry, as an ordinarily prudent person in a like position would use under similar circumstances.&quot; ( Business Judgment Rule ) That standard is hard to meet when a board member attends meetings under the influence of drugs or alcohol. Under those conditions, a director&#39;s judgment is impaired. If the impairment is self-induced, a jury could find that the director was behaving with reckless indifference or deliberate disregard for his/her obligations to the membership. If so, it would be an abdication of their duties as a director. Such behavior is specifically excluded from protection by&nbsp; Corporations Code &sect; 204(a)(10)(iv)&amp;(v) , i.e., the behavior exposes a director to personal liability.&nbsp;What impact does it have on fellow directors? The worst-case scenario is the drunk director gets into a fight with and seriously injures a homeowner at a board meeting. The injured owner then sues the board for not previously taking action against the inebriated director. While the likelihood of success against all directors would depend upon the foreseeability of the impaired director&#39;s actions, the lawsuit would certainly succeed against the problem director. The plaintiff would also prevail against the association since the director&#39;s actions occurred while in his official capacity. If the board does nothing, it has the effect of condoning the director&#39;s bad behavior--something that could be used against the board at the time of trial. To protect themselves and the association, fellow directors should warn the impaired director to go home and sleep it off and never again appear at a meeting intoxicated. If the bad behavior continues, the board should&nbsp; censure the director .&nbsp;If the director is an officer, he can be&nbsp;removed from office&nbsp;by fellow directors. Unseating him from the board is not an option unless the bylaws specifically authorize it. That is something normally reserved for the membership via a&nbsp; recall election . Even so, the board can, on its own initiative, initiate a recall and put the matter before the membership for a vote. If boards have not already done so, they should adopt a &quot;Code of Conduct&quot; or &quot;Ethics Policy&quot; to address these kinds of situations. It gives fellow directors something to reference when talking to a wayward director and provides a stronger basis for censure. Breach of Fiduciary Duties Board members are held to a high standard of conduct, the breach of which may subject each or all of them to individual liability. ( Raven&#39;s Cove v. Knuppe ) Board members can, however, make incorrect decisions, as well as correct ones, so long as it is faithful to the corporation and use their best business judgment. ( Behan v. Lido Isle ) If a director discloses confidential information without prior board approval, that director acts outside his/her scope of authority and could be&nbsp; personally liable &nbsp;for claims of defamation, invasion of privacy, violations of statutes, etc. The association&#39;s insurance would likely not cover any judgments against the director. &quot;Where it can be shown that a director seeks information to damage the corporation, the director&#39;s claim that he needs the information to fulfill his fiduciary duties to the corporation has no merit.&quot;&nbsp; (Washington ex rel. Paschall v. Scott,&nbsp; 247 P.2d 543 (Wash. 1952))&nbsp;Directors who breach their duties can be censured .&nbsp; Business Judgment Rule Courts will use the Business Judgment Rule to determine whether directors violated their fiduciary duties. To avoid potential breaches, boards should adopt an ethics policy to guide directors. &ldquo;Notwithstanding the deference to a director&rsquo;s business judgment, the rule does not immunize a director from liability in the case of his or her abdication of corporate responsibilities.&rdquo; ( Palm Springs Villas II v Parth ) &quot;A director cannot close his eyes to what is going on about him in the conduct of the business of the corporation and have it said that he is exercising business judgment.&#39;&rdquo; ( Burt v. Irvine Co ) ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login