URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/F/Firearms-Guns

Firearms-Guns You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME F Firearms-Guns Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings FIREARMS AND SELF-DEFENSE Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Legal Issues Security Security&nbsp;Liability Security&nbsp; Cameras Census&nbsp;Takers Sex Offenders Firearms Felonies &amp; Misdemeanors Firearms in the Common Areas If a person is not licensed to own a firearm, California laws prohibiting the carrying of a loaded firearm in any &quot;public place&quot; apply. (Penal Code &sect;&sect; 25400, 25850, 26350, 26400) The term &ldquo;public place&rdquo; is not defined, but most California courts have interpreted the restriction to apply if the area is reasonably accessible to the public without a barrier. ( People v. Yarbrough (2008) 169 Cal.App.4th 303, holding a private driveway may be a &ldquo;public place&rdquo; as applied to California&rsquo;s loaded carry restrictions)&nbsp;In&nbsp; Nahrstedt v. Lakeside Village , the California Supreme Court stated that &ldquo;use restrictions are an inherent part of any common interest development and are crucial to the stable, planned environment of any shared ownership arrangement.&quot; And, associations &quot;may limit activities conducted in the common areas.&rdquo; Accordingly, associations can restrict residents from openly carrying firearms in the common areas. Common Areas a Public Place? &nbsp;Are common areas a public place? If so, then California&rsquo;s restrictions against carrying a loaded firearm in the common areas apply. One court has already determined that private association meetings are &quot;public&quot; forums for the limited purpose of free speech by the membership. ( Damon v. Ocean Hills ) It is likely courts would also deem common areas a &quot;public place&quot; for the association&#39;s membership. Therefore, anyone carrying a loaded firearm in the common areas would need to be licensed. Individuals with a license to carry a loaded firearm are generally exempt from California&rsquo;s restrictions. (Penal Code &sect;&sect; 25655, 26010) No Gun Bans . Although HOAs can regulate handguns in the common areas, any attempt by a board to ban gun ownership would be struck down. In&nbsp; Heller,&nbsp; the court &nbsp; ruled that a person has a right to defend himself with a firearm in his home. The U.S. Supreme Court&nbsp;also overturned a Chicago ban on handguns. ( McDonald v. City of Chicago &nbsp;(2010) 130 S.Ct. 3020) Self-Defense in the Common Areas Self-defense is not limited to a person&#39;s home. In California, people have the right to defend themselves and others against imminent harm, regardless of location. The right to self-defense does not change based on whether the threat of harm is inside the home or outside. The benefit of being inside your home is the presumption that you acted in self-defense. ( Penal Code &sect; 198.5 ) Self-Defense in Common Areas . Even though a person may lawfully defend himself with a firearm in the common areas, if he is not licensed to carry it in a public place, he could face prosecution for the unlawful possession of and or carrying of a firearm in connection with any incident involving it. In addition, if he shoots another person, he will need to prove: &nbsp;He reasonably believed he or someone else was in imminent danger of being harmed; &nbsp;He reasonably believed the use of force was necessary to defend against that danger, and &nbsp;He only used the amount of force reasonably necessary to defend against that danger. HOA Gun Registration Required? Can a board require residents to register their guns with the association? Probably not. There is no safety or security benefit to registration since HOAs cannot license or ban gun ownership. Moreover, Penal Code, &sect;25605(b) provides that no permit or license to purchase, own, possess, keep, or carry, either openly or concealed, shall be required of any citizen of the United States or legal resident over the age of 18 years. While this statute applies only to government registration of firearms, it shows a public policy against registration. In&nbsp; Nahrstedt , the Supreme Court used public policy as one of the criteria for judging the reasonableness of a restriction. The Second Amendment to the U.S. Constitution guarantees the right of citizens to possess firearms. However, the right is subject to reasonable regulation. ( Dist. of Columbia v. Heller &nbsp;(2008) 554 U.S. 570, 626-27; governments can impose narrowly prescribed and reasonable restrictions on guns.) For example, you cannot carry a firearm onto a commercial airliner. If airport screeners find one, you won&#39;t be boarding the plane. By extension, reasonable regulation of firearms also applies to community associations. A court would likely deem an association&#39;s registration of firearms to be inconsistent with public policy and invalidate the requirement.&nbsp; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login