URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/H/Hoarding

Hoarding You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME H Hoarding Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings HOARDING vs POOR HOUSEKEEPING Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Disabled Discrimination Reasonable&nbsp; Accommodation Service &amp; Emotional Support Animals Mental Illness Disabled&nbsp;Parking Swimming Pools Hoarders Poor Housekeeping is Not Actionable The courts decided associations cannot expect judicial relief if someone is a poor housekeeper. One association inspected an owner&#39;s unit owner&#39;s unit and found it&nbsp;in disarray. The board demanded that he cease using his downstairs bathroom for storage, clear his bed of all paper and books, remove boxes and papers stored in his unit, and remove all clothing he had not worn in the past five years. However, books considered &quot;standard reading material&quot; could&nbsp;remain in place. The matter ended up in court.&nbsp;Although the association claimed the clutter was a fire hazard, the fire department and the court disagreed. The judge scolded the association for its &quot;high-handed&quot;&nbsp;attempt to micromanage the owner&#39;s&nbsp;housekeeping. Particularly&nbsp;galling&nbsp;to the court was the presumptuous attempt to lecture Cunningham about getting rid of his old clothes, how he kept his bedroom, and the kind of reading material he could have.&nbsp;( Fountain Valley Chateau Blanc v. Dept. of V.A .) The lesson from the case is that the clutter in a unit must represent a true health and safety issue before an association can take action. Such is the case with hoarders. Hoarding Defined Hoarding is a mental illness sometimes referred to as &quot;Collyer Syndrome&quot; after two brothers who lived in Harlem in the early 1900s. They were compulsive pack rats who collected junk for decades. Both were found dead in their 4-story brownstone surrounded by 140 tons of junk and debris. (See Wikipedia article ) As with the Collyer brothers, hoarding can be life-threatening to the hoarder and to other residents in a condominium development. The debris in a hoarder&#39;s unit will attract&nbsp;and breed roaches, ants, silverfish, and rodents that spread to the common areas and other units. In addition, the damp, unsanitary conditions become a breeding ground for mold and bacteria that migrate into common area walls and HVAC ducts. Finally, the mountains of debris in a hoarder&#39;s unit become&nbsp;a fire hazard. If the association becomes aware of the problem and does nothing, it can be liable for damage to surrounding units and health injuries to other residents. Inspecting the Unit A board might learn of a hoarder&#39;s presence when&nbsp;tracking down a water leak, looking for the source of insects, or from complaints of foul odors. When such problems are traced to a particular unit, the association has a duty to investigate. All condominium CC&amp;Rs have (or should have) an inspection provision allowing the association to enter a unit to inspect and repair the common areas surrounding a unit. If the suspected hoarder grants access, the person making the inspection should be accompanied by a witness to guard against the hoarder&#39;s claims of harassment, theft, damage to property, etc. The witness can also help document (and testify to) the condition of the unit. An inspection request is more often than not denied. Hoarders are often reclusive and embarrassed about their living conditions, or worse, their sickness has reached a level where the person is paranoid that the association will steal their treasured possessions. If access is denied, a disciplinary hearing should be held,&nbsp; and daily fines should be levied to encourage cooperation by the hoarder. A court order may be needed if &nbsp; the hoarder continues to block access. How to Address Hoarding Problems Public Agencies . If the inspection reveals health and safety hazards, the condition of the unit will need to be thoroughly documented (preferably with photographs). Demands can then be made to clean the unit. A hoarder&#39;s sickness will&nbsp;often prevent him from complying with the demand. At that point, city/county health services and the fire department should be contacted . Public agency documentation of the conditions in the unit will be useful if subsequent litigation is warranted. Case Law . A hoarding case in Tennessee is instructive. The grossly unsanitary conditions and extremely offensive odors in a unit in the Windsor Tower Condominiums created a nuisance and posed a threat to the health and safety of other owners. One witness who had been allowed in the unit testified that &quot;the odor was so strong and offensive that he had to cover his mouth and nose because it caused him to gag.&quot; There was testimony of rotten food&nbsp;on floors and furniture, cabinets covered in rotting food, and a bathroom with a buildup of scum and urine.&quot; In addition, mold was growing on windows, walls, and curtains. The association became concerned about airborne bacteria and mold circulating from the hoarder&#39;s unit into the building&#39;s shared HVAC&nbsp;system. After protracted, unsuccessful attempts to resolve the problem, the association filed suit. The CC&amp;Rs had a provision that allowed the association to take possession of the unit and sell it. Accordingly, the board sought a judicial sale of the condominium. The court ruled for the association. It held that a forced sale of the unit was appropriate because of &quot;Ms. Harris&#39;&quot; continual denial&nbsp;that any odor existed, the Association&#39;Association&#39;sd generous efforts over more than a year to help remedy the problem, Ms. Harris&#39;s continuing failure to remedy&nbsp;the situation, and the gravity of the nuisance created by Ms. Harris and its impact on the other residents.&quot;&nbsp;( 4215 Harding Road HOA v. Harris ) Additional Information . For additional information, see&nbsp; HoardingCleanup.com . Recommendation : Because hoarding is an illness, associations cannot expect a quick, inexpensive solution when they discover a hoarder in their midst. Accordingly, they should budget for extra legal expenses since court intervention is likely needed to force a resolution. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login