URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/H/Hold-Harmless-Indemnify-Exculpatory-Language

Hold Harmless, Indemnify, Exculpatory Language You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME H Hold Harmless, Indemnify, Exculpatory Language Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings HOLD HARMLESS & INDEMNIFY Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Shifting Risk Hold harmless and indemnity provisions are used to shift risk from one party to another. They can be beneficial or harmful to an association depending on how they are used. They are commonly found in: Governing Documents. CC&amp;Rs and bylaws commonly contain language shifting liability for negligent acts from volunteers to the association. Without such provisions, it would be difficult or impossible to find volunteers. Contracts . When used in contracts, they can be harmful to associations if improperly drafted. Covenants . Recorded maintenance covenants between the association and a homeowner who modifies common area elements often contain hold harmless and indemnity provisions from injury or damage caused by the alterations. Facility Rental Agreements . Common area rental agreements by members to use the clubhouse, pool, open space area, etc. for private events normally contain hold harmless and indemnity provisions protecting the association from liability in the event someone is injured. Hold Harmless Provisions A &quot;hold harmless&quot; or &quot;liability waiver&quot; provision in a contract is an agreement between the parties whereby one or both parties agree not to hold the other party responsible for any loss, damage, or legal liability that may arise under the agreement. In other words, the two parties cannot sue each other for any damage they may suffer due to the negligence of the other party. Hold harmless provisions are often combined with indemnity language. Following is an example: &quot;Contractor shall indemnify, defend (by counsel reasonably acceptable to Association) and hold harmless the Association and its officers, directors, agents and employees from and against claims, damages, losses and expenses, including but not limited to attorneys&#39; fees, arising out of or resulting from the negligence or misconduct of Contractor in connection with performance of the work described in this Agreement.&quot; Indemnity Provisions To &quot;indemnify&quot; is to protect against or reimburse for damage, injury or loss. Typically, an association&#39;s governing documents will indemnify officers and directors against expenses, judgments, fines, settlements and attorneys&#39; fees reasonably incurred in connection with any threatened or actual civil or criminal proceedings. In civil proceedings, officers and directors may be indemnified if they acted in good faith and in a manner reasonably believed to be in the best interests of the association. In the case of criminal proceedings, they may be indemnified if they had no reasonable cause to believe their conduct was unlawful. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7237 ) Are the words &ldquo;indemnify&rdquo; and &ldquo;hold harmless&rdquo; synonymous? No. One is offensive and the other is defensive&mdash;even though both contemplate third-party liability situations. &ldquo;Indemnify&rdquo; is an offensive right&mdash;a sword&mdash;allowing harmless&rdquo; is defensive: The right not to be bothered by the other party itself seeking indemnification. ( Queen Villas Homeowners Assn, v TCB Property Management , (2007) 149 Cal.App.4th 1, 9) Exculpatory Language Exculpatory language relieves a party from liability under certain conditions. The enforceability of exculpatory language in CC&amp;Rs is unclear. Following is an example: &quot;Neither the Association nor the Board of Directors shall be liable for damages to any Owner resulting from water which may leak or flow from outside of any unit or from any part of the building by reason of a mistake in judgment or negligence.&quot;&nbsp;A leading case on such provisions noted that &quot;The law has traditionally viewed with disfavor attempts to secure insulation from one&#39;s own negligence or willful misconduct, and such provisions are strictly construed against the person relying on them.&quot; ( Franklin v. Marie Antoinette ) The court looked at the narrow issue of whether a non-negligent association may contractually shift the risk of loss to the condominium owner and concluded that the contractual allocation of risk was reasonable and fair to the condominium owners as a whole. The court noted that: By reducing the Association&#39;s risk of liability, the condominium owners have reduced their own risk. The condominium owners are, after all, the ones who are assessed to pay for improvements, insurance premiums, liability judgments not covered by insurance, and the like. Plaintiff is only one of many owners who collectively entered into the contract (CC&amp;Rs) with the Association. A reasonable and fair reduction of the Association&#39;s risk which mutually benefits the condominium owners as a whole does not suddenly become violative of public policy upon the non-negligent infliction of property damage to an individual unit. ( Franklin v. Marie Antoinette ) Another case involving homeowner associations, stated the following: ...the California Supreme Court has evinced a clear policy of enforcing only those exculpatory provisions which do not affect &ldquo;the public interest.&rdquo; Factors to be considered in determining whether a business or transaction affects a public interest include: (a) whether the matter is suitable for public regulation; (b) whether the party provides a service of importance to the public; (c) whether the party invoking it possesses a bargaining advantage against any member of the public who seeks such service; (d) and whether one party is particularly subject to the other&#39;s control and the risk of his or her carelessness. ...we view the Association of homeowners as occupying a particularly elevated position of trust because of the many interests it monitors and services it performs. Therefore, we hold that the exculpatory provisions contained in the Declaration constitute no bar to suit against the Association. ( Cohen v. Kite Hill &nbsp;at page 654-655) Generally Enforceable . Generally, a clause exempting a party from liability for that party&#39;s own negligence is enforceable, absent a specific public interest or statutory exception. These types of exculpatory clauses have been upheld in numerous contexts. For example, in&nbsp; Randas v. YMCA 0/ Metropolitan Los Angeles &nbsp;(1993), 17 Cal.App.4th 158, the court upheld an exculpatory clause in the context of a swimming pool accident at a YMCA swimming pool. In&nbsp; Platzer v. Mammoth Mountain Ski Area&nbsp; (2002), 104 Cal.App.4th 1253, the court upheld the validity of an exculpatory clause in the context of chair lift accident at a ski resort. In the older case of&nbsp; Werner v. Knoll &nbsp;(1948), an exculpatory clause was upheld in the context of a lease agreement between a tenant farmer and a landowner. More recently, an exculpatory clause was upheld in a drilling contract.&nbsp; CAZA Drilling (California), Inc. v. TEG Oil &amp; Gas USA, Inc. &nbsp;(2006) 142 Cal.App.4th 453. As noted in 1 Witkin, Summary o/California Law 10th Ed. (2005), Section 660 at 737-38: &quot;The present view is that a contract exempting liability for ordinary negligence is valid where no public interest is involved and no statute expressly prohibits it.&quot; Recommendation : Even though the law is unsettled, associations should include reasonable exculpatory language in their CC&amp;Rs when they&nbsp; amend or restate &nbsp;their documents. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login