URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/H/Hardwood-Flooring-Acoustics

Hardwood Flooring Acoustics You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME H Hardwood Flooring Acoustics Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings HARD-SURFACED FLOORS IN CONDOS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Rules &amp; Regulations Renters Pets Daycare, Drones, Flags Vehicles Clubhouse, Gym, Pool Nuisance Issues Clotheslines, Gardens, Turf &nbsp; Nuisance Defined Nuisance Noise Secondhand Smoke Marijuana Right to Quiet Enjoyment &quot;Quiet enjoyment&quot; is the right of a property owner or tenant to enjoy his/her property in peace without interference. Disruption of quiet enjoyment may constitute a nuisance , which is generally prohibited by an association&#39;s CC&amp;Rs. Even though owners have the right to&nbsp;quiet enjoyment&nbsp;of their property, that does not mean they have the right to a noise-free environment. To constitute a nuisance, the noise must be such that it causes an unreasonable disturbance or annoyance. The occasional cry of a baby or the faint sound of a radio or television does not constitute a nuisance. A barking dog could constitue a nuisance. Reasonableness . Having an allergy does not give an owner the right to ruin a neighbor&#39;s life. Many&nbsp;hypoallergenic rugs and other products on the market could have resolved the allergy without creating noise problems. On the other hand, if the association had flatly refused the installation of flooring of any kind, it could have lost the case. Associations must be careful to balance their restrictions against the needs of the disabled. An unpublished case offers some guidance that addresses hardwood floors and the disabled. In this case, the association was found to have discriminated against a disabled member when it refused to reasonably accommodate her hardwood floors. ( Savoy v. Zhang ) Subjective . Because a nuisance is mainly subjective, associations are not obligated to become involved in disputes where the noise causes mere inconvenience. If, in the board&#39;s opinion, a nuisance exists, it may send a cease and desist letter, impose&nbsp;fines, suspend privileges, and/or take legal action. Objective Standards . &nbsp;An objective standard is better when it comes to hardwood floors. This will minimize potential litigation. &nbsp; Bootlegged Hardwood Floors &nbsp; A common problem encountered by condominium associations is excessive noise created by bootlegged hardwood floors. Some owners have the mistaken belief they can override CC&amp;R restrictions by approval from the building department or by claiming allergies. The first is never true, and the second may require some form of reasonable accommodation. In&nbsp; Ryland Mews HOA v. Munoz , a new owner installed hardwood floors violating the CC&amp;Rs and created intolerable noise conditions for the owner below. When confronted, Munoz refused to mitigate the problem by&nbsp;claiming his wife suffered severe allergies. The association sued Munoz for (i) creating a nuisance that unreasonably interfered with the quiet enjoyment of another owner&#39;s condominium, (ii) altering his unit in a manner that increased sound transmission to an adjoining unit, and (iii) failing to get written approval from the architectural committee. Court Order . The association asked the court to issue a&nbsp; preliminary injunction &nbsp;that Munoz address the noise transmission problem pending trial on the merits. The court agreed and ordered Munoz to install rugs over 80% of his floors. Munoz appealed and lost. Munoz&#39;s violation of the CC&amp;Rs and his refusal to compromise saddled him with an order to install rugs, a looming trial that could result in fines, an award of attorney&#39;s fees, and an order to remove his hardwood floors.&nbsp;( Ryland Mews HOA v. Munoz ) Transfer of Property . If the owner had sold his unit without resolving the unauthorized floor installation, the violation would have&nbsp; transferred to the buyer . Building Code Acoustical Requirements Code requirements are usually satisfied with carpet. However, hard-surfaced flooring creates noise transmission problems. The following are recommended FIIC guidelines for hard surface flooring. Housing Wood Construction Concrete Construction Government 45 45 Entry-level 48 50 Standard 52 54 High 57 60 Luxury 60 62 NOTE:&nbsp;Buildings are not soundproof, and sounds will remain audible even when the requirements are met. Many boards have adopted standards that are higher than local building codes. Because 45 is unacceptably noisy, many associations have adopted a minimum standard of 52, and others are using 55. Recognizing the problem of excessive noise, many local jurisdictions also set higher STC ratings. One example is the City of Redondo Beach, California, which requires an STC of 55 (see City of Redondo Beach Municipal Code, Section 10.2.1608). Associations without an acoustical standard should consider adopting one. Adopting a reasonable acoustical standard will allow the installation of hard-surfaced flooring while minimizing noise transmission to lower units. This will increase property values and minimize disputes between neighbors. Sound Intensity Chart &nbsp; A decibel (dB) is the unit of measurement for sound intensity. Broadly, there are two types of sounds within a building: (i)&nbsp; Airborne Sounds , which &nbsp; are sounds transmitted through air, such as voices or radio playing, and (ii)&nbsp; Impact Sounds , which are created by the impact of an object with building elements or furnishings, such as footsteps, dropped objects, toys, furniture scraps, piping, and some appliance sounds. &nbsp; A 10-decibel increase means the sound is ten times louder.&nbsp;Prolonged exposure to noise louder than 85 decibels can impair hearing. &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; Very painful 160 Shotgun &nbsp; &nbsp; Painful 140 Stock car race &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 130 Jackhammer &nbsp; &nbsp; Deafening 120 Rock concert &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 100 Chainsaw &nbsp; &nbsp; Very loud 90 Hair dryer &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 80 Police whistle &nbsp; &nbsp; Loud 70 Average radio &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 60 Normal conversation &nbsp; &nbsp; Moderate 50 Average Office &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 40 Quiet radio &nbsp; &nbsp; Faint 30 Whisper &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 20 Rustling leaves &nbsp; &nbsp; Very faint 10 Soundproof room &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; 0 &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; STC: &nbsp; Sound Transmission Class . Laboratory measurement of the ability of walls and floors to mitigate airborne sounds, including voice, television, and alarm clocks. &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; NIC: &nbsp; Noise Isolation Class . An overall measure of the sound isolation between units in a multi-family dwelling. A field measurement of the ability of floor-ceiling assembly to mitigate airborne sounds. &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; IIC: &nbsp; Impact Insulation Class . IIC is a number rating for evaluating the impact noise insulation of a floor-ceiling assembly. &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; FIIC: &nbsp; Field Impact Insulation Class . A field measurement, i.e., done after a hardwood floor installation is completed to test actual noise transmission into the unit below. The higher the value, the greater the noise isolation. For example, an STC of 52 provides better sound protection than an STC of 45. Building codes typically require that floors provide airborne sound insulation to meet an STC of 45 (field-tested) and an IIC of 45 (field-tested) for impact noise.&nbsp; Note:&nbsp; local building codes may require higher standards. Additional Information The Acoustics of Floors in Condominiums AcoustiCORK Acousti-Mat Acoustical Surfaces, Inc. Easy Mat ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login