URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/H/Homeowner-HO-6-Insurance-Policy

Homeowner HO-6 Insurance Policy You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME H Homeowner HO-6 Insurance Policy Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings HOMEOWNER AND RENTER INSURANCE Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links HOA Insurance Contractors, Owners &amp; Renters Fire Safety Homeowners &amp; Renters Contractors Homeowner &quot;HO-6&quot; Insurance Policy Condominiums . Owners can be required to carry an HO-6 policy (&quot;Homeowners 6&quot; or &quot;Condominium Unit Owner Policy&quot;). Without it, condominium owners are exposed to loss and are more likely to sue the association to cover their losses. Moreover, the secondary mortgage market ( Fannie Mae ) now requires protection for owners. Owners&#39; insurance should cover the following: Personal Property . This coverage insures unit contents such as furniture, clothing, dishes, appliances, computers, etc. Owners with high-value jewelry, art, or collectibles need a &quot;scheduled or unscheduled floater.&quot; &nbsp; Personal Liability . Although associations carry premises liability insurance for the common areas to cover claims for bodily injury or property damage, it does not cover injuries or damage inside an owner&#39;s unit. Condo owners must carry personal liability insurance if someone is injured in their condo. This should also cover injuries in neighboring units caused by fires or floods originating in an owner&#39;s unit. &nbsp; Loss of Use . This protection pays for extra expenses (hotel, restaurants, etc.) while the owner&#39;s home is uninhabitable because of damage. &nbsp; Loss Assessment . Loss assessment coverage covers the owner&#39;s portion of special assessments levied by the association resulting from insured losses. &nbsp; Walls-In . To satisfy FHA requirements , an owner&#39;s real property coverage must be a &quot;walls-in&quot; policy instead of &quot;bare walls.&quot; It insures improvements not covered by the association&#39;s master policy, such as hardwood floors, carpet, kitchen cabinets, plumbing, and electrical fixtures, etc. &nbsp; Earthquake Loss Assessment pays for losses related to an earthquake. Loss Assessment Insurance .&nbsp;Loss assessment insurance covers an owner&#39;s portion of special assessments levied by the association to cover&nbsp;losses that&nbsp;exceed&nbsp;the association&#39;s policy limits. Following are two examples: A child is seriously injured in the association&#39;s swimming pool, and $5 million in damages are awarded, but the association is only insured up to $2 million A director defames a homeowner, and a court awards damages that exceed policy limits. A fire causes significant damage to the clubhouse, but the association is underinsured for the loss; the cost to repair exceeds the association&#39;s policy limits by $300,000. In each case, the association must levy a&nbsp;special assessment&nbsp;to cover the difference between the policy limits and the loss suffered. If a homeowner were to carry &quot;loss assessment&quot; coverage, they would pay his share of the special assessment. Loss assessment insurance is purchased by individual homeowners, not the association. It can be a stand-alone policy, but more often, it is a rider added to an underlying policy purchased by the owner. Its availability is uncertain: If an association does not carry&nbsp;earthquake insurance, loss assessment coverage (if available) will pay for special assessments related to earthquake damage. (See the&nbsp; California Earthquake Authority (CEA) &nbsp;website for more information and talk to an insurance broker.) Only pays up to the amount of coverage purchased by the owner. If an Owner buys a $1,000 policy and owners are hit with a $9,000 special assessment, the policy will only pay $1,000. The homeowner will be responsible for the remaining $8,000. We will not cover special assessments for deferred maintenance. May or may not cover an owner&#39;s portion of the association&#39;s deductible. If an association has a $50,000 deductible, homeowners will be specially assessed to cover the deductible. Renter &quot;HO-4&quot; Insurance Policy Renters must carry their own insurance to cover their personal property and to cover personal liability against named-perils. It also includes liability insurance for damage to the property or for injuries to other people in the rented dwelling. Amend CC&amp;RS to Require Insurance Associations should amend their CC&amp;Rs to require owners and tenants to carry insurance. To avoid potential liability, the amendment should also relieve the association of enforcement requirements related to the amendment. In addition, boards should regularly publish reminders that owners and renters must carry their own insurance. Forms of Homeowner Insurance &quot;HO&quot; in the following policies stands for &quot;Homeowner.&quot; Exclusions for each policy generally include: war, nuclear hazard, earth movement, neglect, ordinance or law, flood, off-premises power shortages, and intentional acts. Each policy includes property damage and general liability.&nbsp;The&nbsp;differences in the&nbsp;forms&nbsp;are primarily in&nbsp;the covered perils in the property damage portion of the policy. HO-0 :&nbsp;Dwelling and Fire. Provides coverage to an owner&#39;s home against fire, explosions, smoke, hail, lightning, windstorm, vehicles, and civil unrest. There is no coverage for personal property, personal liability, or medical expenses. HO-1 :&nbsp;Basic Form. Protects the dwelling against eleven named perils: fire, lightning, hail, windstorm, theft, vandalism, damage from vehicles and aircraft, riots and civil commotion, volcanic eruption, and glass breakage. It does not cover floods and earthquakes. HO-2 :&nbsp;Broad Form. This policy specifically covers perils listed in the policy and no others. There are seventeen perils listed on a broad form policy: the eleven covered under an HO-1 policy plus protection against falling objects, the weight of ice or snow, and malfunctioning electrical and other household equipment. It also provides living expenses if the dwelling is uninhabitable. HO-3 :&nbsp;Special Form. Designed for single-family homes, it covers any damage to a house or other structures unless the peril is specifically excluded. Floods and earthquakes are excluded. Coverage for personal property is for named perils only. HO-4 :&nbsp;Renters. Covers a tenant&rsquo;s personal property and personal liability against named perils. It also includes liability insurance for damage to the property or for injuries to other people in the rented dwelling. HO-5 :&nbsp;Comprehensive Form. As long as the cause of damage is not excluded on the policy, any damage to the dwelling and its contents are covered. HO-6 :&nbsp;Condominiums. Designed specifically for condominiums and cooperatives, it does not cover the structure since that is covered by the association. Instead, it covers improvements to the airspace, such as carpeting, wallpaper, built-in appliances, and kitchen cabinets. It also provides coverage for personal property and personal liability. All perils covered in an HO-2 policy are similarly covered by an HO-6. See a&nbsp; more complete description . HO-7 :&nbsp;Mobile Homes. This policy provides protection for mobile and manufactured homes and covers the structure, adjacent structures, and personal belongings. Liability coverage for accidents can be included. HO-8 :&nbsp;Older Houses. The policy is similar to an HO-3 policy, but modified to meet the needs of the older home since it would cost more to repair than its market value. It pays the cost to repair or replace damaged property with common construction materials. For example, plaster walls would be replaced with drywall. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login