URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/H/HOA-Bank-Accounts-Signature-Cards-Insurance

HOA Bank Accounts, Signature Cards & Insurance You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME H HOA Bank Accounts, Signature Cards & Insurance Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings BANK ACCOUNTS & SIGNATURE CARDS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Annual Budgets Collections Audits &amp; Reviews Bank Accounts &amp; Loans Reserves Taxes Bank Accounts Loans to Associations Insuring &amp; Investing Funds Bank Account Requirements California Financial Institutions . As provided for in Civil Code &sect; 5380 , managing agents , either persons or entities, who for compensation or, in expectation of compensation, exercise control over the assets of the association that receive funds belonging to an association must deposit them into: An escrow account with a bank, savings association, or credit union in California, insured by the federal government,&nbsp; An account under the control of the association, or A trust fund account maintained by the managing agent in a bank, savings association, or credit union in California. A &ldquo;managing agent&rdquo; does not include a full-time employee of the association, a regulated financial institution operating within the ordinary course of business, or an attorney at law acting within the scope of their license. Managing Agent Separate Accounts .&nbsp;Associations must set up a bank account that keeps their funds separate and distinct from their&nbsp;managing agent&rsquo;s funds. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5380(b)(3) ) The managing agent must maintain a separate record of the receipt and disposition of all funds, including any interest earned. With a limited exception, the managing agent may not commingle the association&rsquo;s funds with their own money or with the money of others. Operating and Reserve Funds . While it may be a good idea to keep operating and reserve monies in separate accounts, the Davis-Stirling Act is ambiguous. The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) guidelines do not require separate accounts. From a tax perspective, case law generally refers to the requirement for separate bank accounts. However, two cases states that separate bank accounts are not required if there is an adequate accounting for the separate &ldquo;funds.&rdquo;&nbsp;( Board of Trade v. Commissioner (1996) 106 T.C. 369, separate bank accounts are not required;&nbsp; Maryland Country Club, Inc. v. United States (4th Cir. 1976) 539 F.2d 345 ; t he court concluded separate bank accounts are not required for capital and operating funds, provided accurate records are kept.) Because of the ambiguity, an association is not breaking the law by keeping funds in a single bank account and tracking funds in separate&nbsp;accounting accounts. Even so, the safe approach is to open separate bank accounts. In the Association&#39;s Name . All monies the association receives must be&nbsp;deposited in&nbsp;an account with signature cards established&nbsp;in the association&rsquo;s name.&nbsp; Reserve Funds .&nbsp;A&nbsp;&ldquo;Reserve Account&rdquo;&nbsp;refers to funds&nbsp;the association has set aside to defray the future repair or replacement of, or additions to, those major components that the association is obligated to maintain. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4177 )&nbsp;Except for temporary&nbsp; borrowing , boards may not expend reserve funds for any purpose other than the repair, restoration, replacement, or maintenance of, or litigation involving the repair, restoration, replacement, or maintenance of, major components that the association is obligated to repair, restore, replace, or maintain and for which the reserve fund has been&nbsp;established. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5510(b) )&nbsp;There are also&nbsp; signature requirements &nbsp;for transfers and&nbsp; prudent investment &nbsp;policies that boards need to follow.&nbsp; Fund Transfer Requirements Written Authorization to Transfer Funds . Starting January 1, 2019, boards of directors were required to provide prior written authorization for large fund transfers. Effective January 1, 2022, the legislature established a two-tiered system based on the association&rsquo;s size. Under&nbsp; Civil&nbsp;Code &sect; 5502 , transfers from reserve or operating accounts cannot be made without prior written approval from the board unless the amount of the transfer is less than the following: &diams; The lesser of five thousand dollars ( $5,000) or 5 percent of the estimated income in the annual operating budget for associations with 50 or fewer separate interests. &diams; The lesser of ten thousand dollars ($10,000) or 5 percent of the estimated income in the annual operating budget for associations with 51 or more separate interests. Changes were also made concerning funds accepted or received by a managing agent on behalf of an association at the association&rsquo;s request. Such funds must be deposited into an account in a bank, savings association, or credit union in California insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Administration Insurance Fund, or a guaranty corporation subject to Section 14858 of the Financial Code.&nbsp; Transfer Defined . As initially written, the Assembly bill expressly referenced &ldquo;electronic transfers.&rdquo; The word &ldquo;electronic&rdquo; was removed as the bill made its way through the Senate. The Digest from the Senate Floor Analysis still referred to the bill&rsquo;s purpose as prohibiting &ldquo;electronic transfers from homeowner association accounts without prior board approval.&rdquo; Other types of transfers likely include wire transfers, telephone transfers, etc., which may explain the omission of the word &ldquo;electronic.&rdquo; However, &ldquo;transfer&rdquo; is broadly defined as the movement of funds from one place to another. While it may not be strictly required, the more conservative approach requires board approval of any transfer of funds, including by checks. Recurring Expenses . If routine budgeted transfers on a recurring basis require approval (e.g., property taxes, water bills, power bills, contributions to reserves), a board could approve those transfers in advance. For example, the board could approve all budgeted utility transfers at the beginning of each year for the entire year. Reserve Transfers . The same solution can be used for monthly transfers into reserves that exceed $10,000. Boards can approve a resolution or motion in the minutes, giving written approval to the management company to make such transfers. Cannot Delegate This Duty .&nbsp;Can the approval requirement be delegated to management? The language in&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 5380(b)(6 ) and&nbsp; &sect; 5502 &nbsp;expressly states prior written &ldquo;board&rdquo; approval.&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 4085 &nbsp;defines &ldquo;board&rdquo; as an&nbsp;association&#39;s board of directors. Accordingly, boards cannot&nbsp;delegate&nbsp;approval authority&nbsp;to management. It could, however, delegate it&nbsp;to an &ldquo; Executive Committee &rdquo; composed entirely of directors. Any act or decision by a majority of the directors on the Committee is deemed an act of the board. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7212 ) Bank Signature Cards Banks use&nbsp;bank signature cards to minimize the risk of cashing fraudulent checks. Unless an association&#39;s&nbsp;bylaws state otherwise, the board decides who should be signers of checks. Some boards put all directors on&nbsp;bank signature cards&nbsp;to ensure that at least one director is always available to sign checks. Others restrict the number of authorized signers for stricter control of expenditures.&nbsp;Banks once compared the&nbsp;signatures on checks&nbsp;to those on the signature cards. However, with the advent of electronic banking, signature cards have little significance in the industry.&nbsp; Two Signature Operational Checks . &nbsp;There is no requirement that&nbsp;two directors sign checks against the&nbsp;operating account--it is, however, best practice. It ensures that at least two sets of eyes are on expenditures.&nbsp; Reserves - Two Signatures . Even though banks no longer monitor signatures, the Davis-Stirling Act requires that at least two directors authorize all reserve transfers by associations. For reserve accounts, at least&nbsp;two directors&nbsp;must approve the transfer of funds from&nbsp; reserve accounts .&nbsp;For operating accounts, there is no statutory requirement for board signatures, but that requirement can be found in the governing documents. Some HOA bylaws require the signatures of two directors on all checks; some require at least one officer&#39;s signature, but most are silent on the issue. ( Civ.&nbsp;Code &sect; 5510 ) Bank Processing Policies Inclearings &amp; Automation . Unlike over-the-counter checks, which are deposited at the same bank they are drawn against, &quot;inclearing&quot; checks are deposited at other financial institutions and processed by those institutions through a clearing house such as the Federal Reserve before returning the check to the bank of origin. Once checks enter the system, they are scanned and processed in bulk using high-speed automation instead of being processed one check at a time by a live person. It saves banks time and money and speeds the transfer of funds. It also means banks can no longer compare checks against signature cards. Banks Held Harmless . Banks can still place an alert on accounts if so requested. It means a lone board member cannot walk into a branch and clean out a two-signature account. Even so, language in the signature card and bank disclosure documents holds the bank harmless if the bank honors a one-signature check. That means an association cannot go after the bank if a board member absconds with the money. Instead, the HOA must go after the director. Davis-Stirling Requirements Electronic Signatures . Whether by design or not, the Davis-Stirling Act does not require signatures on a check. Instead, the Act requires a more nebulous requirement of two signatures to withdraw funds without specifying where or how the signatures are employed: The signatures of at least two persons, who shall be members of the association&#39;s board of directors, or one officer who is not a member of the board of directors and a member of the board of directors, shall be required for the withdrawal of money from the association&#39;s reserve accounts. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5510(a) ) The statute intends to ensure that two directors or a director and an officer know about and authorize the withdrawal of reserve funds. If two directors issue written instructions to the association&#39;s management company to make a transfer, the statutory requirement appears to be satisfied. Email Approval . Since&nbsp; electronic signatures &nbsp;are now recognized to be the same as signatures on a piece of paper, they can be used to authorize the transfer of reserve funds. Accordingly, email authorizations from two directors to the management company also satisfy the requirement. Management companies should be careful to preserve those instructions so they have a paper trail showing each transfer was authorized. Otherwise, the management company could find itself in hot water if the transfers were ever challenged. Governing Documents . Despite the above analysis, associations should review their governing documents before changing how they handle reserve transfers. Their CC&amp;Rs or bylaws may contain more stringent requirements for handling reserve funds. If so, those procedures must be followed. Recommendation: Because the two-signature rule applies to associations and not banks, boards cannot rely on banks to monitor checks for them. Instead, boards must adopt&nbsp; internal controls &nbsp;and carefully monitor their reserve accounts for unusual activity. There needs to be safeguards on withdrawing both reserve and operational funds. An additional protection is for boards NOT to authorize debit cards, credit cards, or ATM withdrawals on reserve accounts. In addition, boards still have the option of requiring all transfers from reserves to be done by check and requiring all reserve checks to be signed by two directors. Boards should consult legal counsel, their CPA, and their management company before deciding on a particular policy. Insuring the Association&rsquo;s Funds Federal Deposit Insurance . The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) insures the safety of checking and savings deposits in member banks up to $250,000 per depositor per banking institution (not per bank branch).&nbsp;That means an association can have a dozen $250,000 CDs from twelve different banks, thereby having $3 million covered by FDIC insurance. If a board places $500,000 in a single bank (for a jumbo CD to receive a greater return on its money) and the bank fails, the association loses $250,000. Boards should not exceed $250,000 per financial institution (unless the bank has private insurance to cover the monies). Instead, they should spread their association&rsquo;s money across various FDIC-insured institutions. One way to conveniently spread the money is to use&nbsp;brokerage firms&nbsp;or banks in the&nbsp; CDARS program . See the&nbsp; FDIC website &nbsp;for more information about deposit insurance. Private Insurance .&nbsp; Even if an association&rsquo;s governing documents do not require&nbsp; FDIC-insured &nbsp;investments, boards should ensure their monies are insured. Some banks carry private insurance to cover deposits, including deposits that exceed FDIC limits.&nbsp;Other banks use surety bonds that insure the bank rather than individual accounts. While this reduces the association&rsquo;s risk, it is not risk-free. There are two problems with the bond: (i) the bank is the named insured, not the association, and (ii) the insurance is limited to a specific dollar amount--if the bank fails, the insurance will only pay to its policy limits regardless of the aggregate amount in depositor accounts. It means any gap in coverage falls to the depositors, who may be paid only pennies on the dollar.&nbsp;If boards elect to use non-FDIC-insured accounts, they should ensure their governing documents allow them to place funds in non-FDIC-insured institutions. Crime Insurance .&nbsp;Beginning January 1, 2019, associations must purchase what the statute calls a &ldquo; Fidelity Bond .&rdquo; Miscellaneous &nbsp; Investing Reserve Funds Lender Questionnaires ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login