URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/H/HOA-Social-Media

Social Media You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME H HOA Social Media Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings SOCIAL MEDIA & WEBSITES Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Director Elections Campaigning Director Term of Office Campaigning Free Speech Signs, Posters and Flyers Social Media Social Media Associations cannot prohibit members from using social media or other online resources to make statements critical of the association or its governance. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4515(b)(6) ) Associations are not required to provide members with social media or other online resources (such as association websites). ( Civ. Code &sect; 4515(b)(6) ) Chat Rooms .&nbsp; Association-sponsored online forums, chat rooms, and bulletin boards allow members to get to know each other and let off a little steam. Unfortunately, they are frequently taken over by small groups of disaffected owners who engage in personal attacks, gossip, obscenities, hostile diatribes, and defamation. Also, some owners have the mistaken belief that chat rooms serve as a means for communicating with the board and making demands. Directors who respond to such communications expose their association to potential risk. Facebook . Facebook poses similar risks for associations if proper protocols are not established. If an association sets up a Facebook account, the admin settings should be set so that only the board or management can post pictures. Individual members should not be allowed to post pictures or make comments on the site. Another precaution: the association should get written permission before posting pictures of members and their children. Next Door . NextDoor is a social network for neighborhoods. It is a neighbor-to-neighbor forum that gives homeowners a convenient place to share information about a good handyman, plumber, or electrician. It can be used to post things for sale, information about local events, or ask for help finding a lost pet.&nbsp;Some consider it the best neighborhood social network ever created, while others consider it the spawn of Hell. It can be both, depending on how it is used.&nbsp;NextDoor is useful when it is used to pass on helpful information about vendors and local events. Unfortunately, some HOA members&nbsp;use it to rant endlessly about the board, the manager, or to bully other members and polarize the&nbsp;community. The site can turn into a toxic dump. Following are&nbsp;comments from&nbsp;former users: I&nbsp;subscribed to NextDoor when I&nbsp;moved into my neighborhood. I have since unsubscribed from all notifications for it - it&#39;s insanely toxic and people are really terrible on there. I absolutely hate Nextdoor. The most toxic social media... neighbors against neighbors. I strongly suggest staying away from this app. I am so sorry I signed up for it. Bullying is at an all time high. National Public Radio learned how easily bad actors can hijack social media. NPR&nbsp; disabled the &quot;comment&quot; &nbsp;portion of its website. They discovered that &quot;public&quot; input turned out to be only .06% of their listeners. They also discovered that the majority of that tiny fraction consisted mostly of disaffected ranters who were abusive and posted endlessly. In other words, the crazies took over. The same thing can happen with NextDoor, where bullies and trolls take over.&nbsp; Recommendation : To keep NextDoor a friendly forum for owners to use, those in charge of the network should set guidelines on what can be posted and stop abusive behavior that can ruin it for everyone. They should block those who use the forum to rant, attack neighbors, board members, and managers, and make threats. Otherwise,&nbsp; HOA Websites HOA Websites . More associations are discovering the benefits of internet websites. They provide easy 24/7 access to the association&#39;s CC&amp;Rs, bylaws, rules, architectural standards, minutes, financial statements, and newsletters.&nbsp;Websites also expose associations to potential liability for defamation, theft of personal information, invasion of privacy, and &quot;rights&quot; organizations seeking litigation targets. To minimize such risks, associations should divide their websites into two sections: (i) one that is open to the public, and (ii) one that is members-only and password-protected. The public portion of the site can have a welcoming page with a description of the development and pictures of the project. The members-only section should contain the governing documents, financial statements, minutes, names of board and staff members, etc. Boards should be cautious about&nbsp; posting the names &nbsp;of delinquent owners, and should not post employee disciplinary actions,&nbsp; executive session minutes , or&nbsp; attorney-client &nbsp;privileged communications.&nbsp; Misleading Owner Websites . Owners can create their own websites and post association information on them. However, they need prominent disclaimers making it clear that their website is not the association&#39;s website, and that they do not speak for the association. Also, owners should not use the association&#39;s name and logo on their website. Otherwise, they may incur potential liability for misrepresentation and violate provisions of the&nbsp; Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act &nbsp;of 1999 (15 U.S.C. &sect;1125(d)) and provisions of the&nbsp; Lanham Act ,&nbsp;which protects trademarks. Also, see&nbsp; Internet Library of Law . ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login