URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/H/HOA-Financial-Audits-and-Reviews

HOA Financial Audits and Reviews You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME H HOA Financial Audits and Reviews Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings HOA ANNUAL AUDIT, REVIEW, COMPILATION Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Annual Budgets Collections Audits &amp; Reviews Bank Accounts &amp; Loans Reserves Taxes Audits &amp; Reviews Financial&nbsp; Statements Accounting&nbsp; Methods Internal Financial Controls Embezzlement Capital Improvements HOA Financial Audits There are three levels of examination for financial statements . Audit . If an association&#39;s governing documents require an audit, a licensee of the California State Board of Accountancy (a Certified Public Accountant ) performs an extensive examination of the association&#39;s financial records and issues a statement as to their compliance with&nbsp;generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). An audit is performed in accordance with GAAS (generally accepted auditing standards) established by the American Institute of CPAs (AICPA). The auditing standards are described in Statements on Auditing Standards (SAS). An audit provides a &quot;reasonable level of assurance&quot; that the financial statements are materially correct. As a result, audits are more expensive than reviews and compilations. Forensic Audit . A forensic audit is more intrusive (and more expensive) than a regular audit and uses an investigative approach to financial records. It is often conducted to ferret out fraud, embezzlement, or other financial improprieties. Review is Required . Unless an association&#39;s governing documents call for an audit, the Davis-Stirling Act requires a &quot;review&quot; of the finances for any fiscal year in which the association&#39;s gross income exceeds $75,000. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5305 ) In a review, a CPA performs limited inquiries in accordance with GAAS (generally accepted auditing standards) established by the AICPA and gives &quot;limited assurance&quot; that the financial statement is materially correct. Reviewing standards are described in Statements on Standards for Accounting and Review Services (SSARS).&nbsp;&nbsp;A copy of the review of the financial statement must be distributed to the members within 120 days after the close of each fiscal year , by individual delivery pursuant to&nbsp; Section 4040 .&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 5305 ) Compilation . A compilation is the lowest level of review in which a CPA assembles information provided by an association. The CPA does not need to be independent and is required to perform very few procedures. Further, the CPA takes little responsibility for the financial statement and gives no assurance of compliance with GAAP. A compilation can be done if an association&#39;s gross income is $75,000 or less. NOTE: Neither audits nor reviews guarantee that embezzlement will be detected. Auditor&#39;s Opinion The purpose of&nbsp;an audit is to determine the accuracy of an association&#39;s financial statement . Once he/she examines the financial records, the auditor will issue a written opinion. Four types of opinions may be offered: Unqualified Opinion . An &quot;unqualified opinion&quot; means the auditor&#39;s opinion of the financial statement is given without any reservations. It means the auditor feels the association followed all accounting rules appropriately and that the financial reports are an accurate representation of its financial condition. &nbsp; Qualified Opinion . A &quot;qualified opinion&quot; by the auditor means some limitations exist, such as an inability to gather certain information or a significant upcoming event that may or may not occur. &nbsp; Disclaimer . A &quot;disclaimer&quot; means the auditor could not express an opinion regarding the association&#39;s financial condition due to an inability to gather certain relevant facts. &nbsp; Adverse Opinion . An &quot;adverse opinion&quot; means the auditor does not believe the association&#39;s financial statements are accurate. Sarbanes-Oxley Audit Standards Sarbanes-Oxley&nbsp;is the name of federal legislation passed by Congress in 2002 following accounting scandals at Enron, Tyco, WorldCom, Global Crossing, and others. The legislation set new auditing standards to ensure that public companies issued accurate financial statements and required the adoption of conflict-of-interest policies. Board Responsibilities under Sarbanes-Oxley: The board is responsible for adopting auditing, internal control, and ethical standards for the company. &nbsp; The board must adopt standards for evaluating public accounting firms and must require the firm to keep accurate records supporting audit findings for at least seven years. &nbsp; The board must ensure a second partner approves each audit. &nbsp; The board must develop internal controls in keeping with revised audit standards for the public accounting firm to evaluate the company&#39;s compliance with said internal controls. Impact on Associations .&nbsp; The new laws only apply to public companies, not nonprofit community associations. Even so, the fallout has affected all audits. Audit requirements regarding documentation have increased, as needs to evaluate internal controls, document such evaluation, test internal controls, and then communicate the deemed weaknesses of internal controls by auditors to their clients. Recommendation : Association boards should work with the association&#39;s auditor to adopt and implement&nbsp; internal financial controls &nbsp;and a&nbsp; conflict of interest policy . ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login