URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/I/Investing-Reserve-Funds

Investing Reserve Funds You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME I Investing Reserve Funds Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings INVESTING RESERVE FUNDS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Annual Budgets Collections Audits &amp; Reviews Bank Accounts &amp; Loans Reserves Taxes Reserve Studies Duty to&nbsp; Fund Reserves Reserve Transfers &amp; Borrowing Investing Reserve Funds Capital&nbsp;Improvements Reserve&nbsp;Companies Prudent Fiscal Management Boards of directors are required to exercise prudent fiscal management in maintaining the integrity of the reserve funds. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5515 ) HOA funds accepted or received by a managing agent (as defined in Civ. Code &sect; 4158 ) must be deposited in accounts that protect the principal and are covered by insurance provided by an agency of the federal government or a guaranty corporation. In no event may those HOA funds accepted or received by a managing agent be invested in stocks or high-risk investment options. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5380 ) Managing Agents . Managing agents who receive HOA funds must deposit them (i)&nbsp; into an escrow account with a bank, savings association, or credit union or into an account under the control of the association, (ii) into a trust fund account maintained by the managing agent in a bank, savings association, or credit union in this state. All funds deposited by the managing agent in the trust fund account shall be kept in this state in a financial institution insured by the federal government or is a guaranty corporation and shall be maintained there until disbursed according to&nbsp;written instructions from the association entitled to the funds. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5380(a) ) The managing agent cannot commingle the funds of the association with the managing agent&rsquo;s own money or with the money of others. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5380(d) ) Investment Strategy Prudent investments of reserve monies should focus on the following parameters in their order of importance: Safety . &nbsp;A board&#39;s primary goal should be preserving the association&#39;s reserves against loss. Sometimes, an association&#39;s governing documents may limit investment opportunities by requiring that funds be kept in FDIC-insured accounts. Following is a hierarchy of risk to the principal: Stocks and non-government bonds (high risk) Mutual funds Money market funds Municipal bonds Treasury money funds (medium risk) Certificates of deposit Treasury bills Ginnie Mae securities Bank savings accounts (low-risk) Liquidity . Liquidity refers to the ability to quickly convert investments into cash. If reserves are tied up on long-term investments, they will not be available in the event the association needs to (i) use funds for emergency repairs, (ii) borrow for short-term operating expenses, or (iii) repair or replace large common area components that reach the end of their useful life earlier than expected. Accordingly, investing all of an association&#39;s reserves into a jumbo 3-year CD would not be prudent. A more prudent strategy is to invest in smaller CDs and stagger them to mature every six months. Yield . Yield is the return received on an investment. Boards should seek a reasonable return on the association&#39;s reserve accounts but should never adopt a strategy emphasizing return over preservation of capital (as occurred with Orange County in the 1990s and resulted in bankruptcy when the investments collapsed). Bank savings accounts may be too conservative due to their low rates of return. Using non-interest-bearing accounts is viewed by some as mismanagement because the funds are not earning any income at all. The most common form of investment used by homeowner associations is the certificate of deposit. Certificates of Deposit &quot;CDs&quot; are interest-bearing,&nbsp; FDIC-insured &nbsp;investments offered by banks and savings &amp; loans. CDs are known as &quot;time deposits&quot; because the account holder has agreed to keep the money in the account for three months to six years. In exchange for tying up the principal, the association earns a guaranteed return at a set percentage rate locked in at the time of purchase. A CD&#39;s return is payable when the CD matures, i.e., at the end of a predetermined period. In exchange for higher rates of return, CDs lack the&nbsp;liquidity of other investments. Cashing the CD early results in penalties.&nbsp;A prudent policy is to make sure money is reasonably available for emergencies. For example, associations that invest in CDs should stagger them so they mature every few months. That way, the association will never be more than 90 days from funds it might need for unexpected repairs. If associations need immediate access to funds, some banks will allow borrowing against the CD if the association pays the interest above what the CD earns. Jumbo CDs . &nbsp;A jumbo CD is a certificate of deposit in a large denomination, usually at a minimum of $100,000. Like a traditional CD, it is a low-risk investment, provided the amounts are within FDIC limits. Jumbo CDs typically deliver a higher rate of return than comparable cash investments such as money market accounts or savings accounts. CDARS Program . &nbsp;For convenience, many associations participate in a program called &quot;Certificate of Deposit Account Registry Service&quot; (CDARS). Boards can deposit amounts that exceed FDIC limits in a single bank and have their funds dispersed into individual CDs up to FDIC limits in member banks across the country. It allows boards to deal with one bank, receive a single statement summarizing all their CDs, and remain fully insured by the FDIC. For more information, check the CDARS website at&nbsp; www.cdars.com .&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp; A video on how it works . Other Investment Vehicles Mutual Funds. Mutual funds are operated by investment companies that raise money from shareholders and invest in a group of assets, such as stocks, bonds, and money market instruments. Investors in the fund receive an equity position in the fund.&nbsp;Mutual funds offer liquidity and convenience but charge fees, often requiring a minimum investment. There are many types of mutual funds, including aggressive growth funds, asset allocation funds, balanced funds, blend funds, bond funds, capital appreciation funds, clone funds, closed funds, crossover funds, equity funds, fund of funds, global funds, growth fund, growth and income fund, hedge fund, income fund, index fund, international fund, money market fund, municipal bond fund, prime rate fund, regional fund, sector fund, specialty fund, stock fund, and tax-free bond fund. Money Market Funds . Money market funds are&nbsp;mutual funds&nbsp;that invest only in money markets. These funds are invested in short-term (one day to one year) debt obligations such as treasury bills,&nbsp;certificates of deposit, and commercial paper. Unlike bank and&nbsp;money market accounts, FDIC does not insure most deposits. Money Market Accounts . Unlike&nbsp;money market funds&nbsp;or&nbsp;mutual funds, a money market account is a savings account offered by banks and credit unions. Like other savings accounts, it is insured&nbsp;by the Federal government. Money market accounts generally pay higher interest than regular savings accounts, have higher minimum balance requirements, and only allow limited withdrawals per month. Municipal Bonds . &nbsp;Cities, counties, states, and school districts issue municipal bonds. The bonds fund projects such as highways, new schools, etc. &quot;General obligation bonds&quot; are unsecured municipal bonds with maturities of at least ten years and are paid off with funds from taxes or other fees.&nbsp;The interest on municipal bonds is usually exempt from federal, state, and local taxes. However, capital gains that occur when the bond is sold or at the time of maturity (if the bond was bought at a discount) are taxable.&nbsp;Municipal bonds are considered safer than corporate bonds because a local government is less likely to go bankrupt than a corporation, but there are no guarantees. Also, the bonds are not&nbsp;FDIC-insured. Treasury Bills .&nbsp;&quot;U.S. Treasury Bills&quot; are debt obligations issued by the U.S. government and backed by its full faith and credit. T-bills have a maturity of one year or less and are exempt from state and local taxes. Brokerage Accounts . Brokerage accounts allow investment brokers to manage the association&#39;s funds for a fee. Using a brokerage firm can have several advantages: Some brokerage firms have a large inventory of CDs from banks nationwide. This saves boards from going from bank to bank, shopping rates, and filling out bank signature cards . The&nbsp;brokerage firm acts as a custodian of the funds so associations can hold several million dollars&rsquo; worth of CDs in a single account while keeping everything within the $250,000 FDIC limit. They&nbsp;provide more competitive yields than would be available through local banks. Brokerage firm financial advisers with experience with community associations provide investment continuity from board to board. Ginnie Mae Securities . Ginnie Mae securities are secure investments that are mortgage-backed securities. Mortgage-backed securities are pools of mortgages used as collateral for issuing securities in the secondary market. Ginnie Mae securities carry the full faith and credit guarantee of the United States government, which means that regardless of the mortgage payment, investors in Ginnie Mae securities receive complete and timely payment of principal and interest. Investment Advisor Using an investment adviser to develop a written investment policy for associations with large reserve deposits is a good idea. Do NOT pay a&nbsp;board member&nbsp;to manage your funds. Instead, an independent third-party professional should be used to develop a sound investment policy. Also, have your attorney review your governing documents to see if there are any restrictions on how monies can be invested. Following is an example of what not to do: Paid Board Member . A homeowner&nbsp;association in Northern California received millions from a construction defect claim. The board paid a fellow director $75,000 to manage the funds. In addition, the director was allowed to receive commissions and trading fees on the funds. &nbsp; The paid financial adviser did not resign from the board--he continued as a board member and voted on matters directly affecting his control of the funds. Because he financially benefited from the use, management, and spending of the settlement funds, his votes ceased to be arm&rsquo;s-length. This created a glaring&nbsp; conflict of interest . Accountability . Another problem with the arrangement was the director&#39;s unwillingness to follow the board&#39;s instructions. While an independent, third-party financial manager will follow instructions (or face potential liability and loss of business), interested directors often do not feel such constraints. They sometimes think it is &quot;their&quot; money and will act outside the scope of their authority, both as a director and a money manager. That occurred in this case. Stock Market Losses .&nbsp; Without board approval, the director invested $3 million in the stock market. His investments resulted in losses of $400,000 before the board took steps to regain control of the situation. Before it was over, the lost principal amount was close to $1 million. Crime Insurance To further protect the association&#39;s funds, the association shall maintain crime insurance, employee dishonesty coverage, fidelity bond coverage, or their equivalent for its directors, officers, and employees in an amount equal to or more than the combined amount of the association&#39;s reserves and total assessments for three months. For more information, see Fidelity Bond&mdash;Crime Insurance . Taxes on Interest Earned Interest on investments is taxable income. If the interest is part of your reserve study&#39;s funding plan, transferring the interest from your reserve account to pay taxes qualifies as &quot;borrowing&quot; from your reserves, which must be repaid. If that is the case, there should be a line item in your budget for taxes, which are paid out the operating account. If the reserve analyst considers the interest earned from reserves as net after tax, the interest earned can go toward taxes. Boards should work with their reserve study provider and their CPA to decide which is the best approach. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login