URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/I/Insurance-Deductible

Insurance Deductible You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME I Insurance Deductible Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings INSURANCE DEDUCTIBLE Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links HOA Insurance Contractors, Owners & Renters Fire Safety Board's Duties HOA Insurance Fidelity Bonds & Employee Dishonesty Cyber Crime Insurance Workers' Compensation Earthquake Insurance Tendering Claims Insurance Deductibles Most insurance policies contain a deductible. Small deductibles usually mean higher premiums, while high deductibles mean lower premiums because the association is sharing risk with the insurance company. Paying the Deductible When a loss occurs from property damage from a water leak, the question of "Who Pays the Deductible?" ultimately arises. If the association is obligated to pay and the deductible is small, associations will cover it from their operations account. When the deductible is large, boards may need to impose a special assessment on the membership to cover it. Assuming the CC&Rs are silent on the issue, boards may adopt a policy on handling the deductible in the event of a loss. If, for example, the association's property damage insurance has a $5,000 deductible and an owner suffers a $20,000 loss due to water damage from the unit owner above, the deductible can be addressed in one of the following ways: 1. Origin of the Loss . If a loss can be attributed to an owner's negligence or intentional acts that result in a claim against the association's insurance, the owner who caused the loss pays the deductible. That means the person in the upper unit who flooded the lower unit (if due to his/her negligence) pays the $5,000 deductible. The board can hold a hearing and impose the cost as a reimbursable special assessment against the owner who caused the loss. 2. Benefit of the Coverage . The lower unit that benefited from the association's insurance pays the deductible. In reality, the person does not actually pay the deductible. The $5,000 is deducted from the $20,000 loss, so the amount paid to the lower unit is only $15,000 instead of $20,000. If the person in the lower unit wants to recover the $5,000 withheld from the payout, he can sue the owner of the upper unit in small claims court. 3. No Negligence . If no negligence or intentional act caused the loss, the deductible is (i) covered by the association or (ii) apportioned against all claimants according to the percentage each claim bears against the total of all claims for the loss. For example, the unit owner suffered a $20,000 loss to his unit, and the association suffered $10,000 in damages to the common areas. That means the unit owner is responsible for 2/3 of the deductible ($3,333), and the association is responsible for the remaining 1/3 ($1,667). As noted above, no one pays the deductible; the proportional amounts are deducted from the respective payouts. Saving for the Deductible To avoid special assessments to pay large insurance deductibles, some associations set aside funds to pay the deductible in the event a loss occurs. The question is where to put the money. Operations . Insurance deductibles do not fit into operations because they're not an annual expense. The payout of a deductible depends on the filing of insurance claims, and associations can go for years without a claim. Putting it in the budget means the deductible must be fully funded in the 12-month budget cycle, which may strain some budgets. It also creates a surplus at the end of the year, assuming no claims are made. Nonprofit corporations are supposed to break even, not run planned surpluses. Reserve Account . Because deductible payouts are periodic, they seem to fit into reserves. However, they don't meet the definition of a reserve component. Their life cycle is unpredictable and may not involve repairing or replacing a major common area component. Even so, the reserve fund appears to be the better place for insurance deductibles--it allows funding over 2 or 3 years and avoids annual budget surpluses. Deductible Fund . The best way to handle the issue is to create a separate fund, but keep the money in the same account as the reserves. Associations can put a line item in their budgets for an "Insurance Deductible Fund" and contribute to the fund over 2 or 3 years. If the insurance deductible is $10,000, boards could budget a modest $278 per month to the fund. At the end of three years, the insurance deductible would be fully funded. At that point, the contribution could be discontinued until an insurance claim is made, at which point the deductible would be replenished with new contributions. In the alternative, the contribution could be permanent to avoid budget ups and downs. At the end of the three years and thereafter, any excess funds in the deductible fund could flow into the reserves. This provides for a smoother budget and has the added benefit of building reserves. When Deductible Starts The deductible obligation does not begin when the association starts incurring expenses. It starts when the board tenders the claim to the carrier. That means the board cannot apply pre-tender expenses against the deductible. This situation often occurs when the board involves corporate counsel and incurs significant legal fees before finally tendering the claim. If the board immediately tenders the claim and then incurs significant legal expenses, they can be credited against the deductible obligations. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login