URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/I/Infraction-Misdemeanor-Felony

Infraction, Misdemeanor, Felony You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME I Infraction, Misdemeanor, Felony Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings FELONIES & MISDEMEANORS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Legal Issues Security Security&nbsp;Liability Security&nbsp; Cameras Census&nbsp;Takers Sex Offenders Firearms Felonies &amp; Misdemeanors Categories of Crimes Infraction . An infraction is a minor violation and is not considered a criminal offense nor does it create a criminal record. Violations are is punishable by a fine, community service, and/or jail time of up to five days. Examples of petty offenses include traffic tickets, trespassing, littering, and disturbing the peace. Misdemeanor . A misdemeanor is more serious than an infraction and is deemed criminal. If sentenced, it becomes part of the person&#39;s public criminal record. A conviction can result in a fine and a jail sentence of up to a year. There are different classes of misdemeanors with different sentencing guidelines: Class A misdemeanor - one year or less, but more than six months; Class B misdemeanor - six months or less, but more than thirty days; or Class C misdemeanor - thirty days or less, but more than five days. Felony . A felony is the most serious type of crime, becomes part of a person&#39;s criminal record, and can result in punishment ranging from a year in jail to life in prison. As with misdemeanors, there are classes of felonies with different sentencing guidelines. Class A felony - life imprisonment or the death penalty; Class B felony - twenty-five or more years; Class C felony - less than twenty-five years, but more than ten years; Class D felony - less than ten years, but more than five years; or Class E felony - less than five years, but more than one year. Restrictions on Housing Associations cannot ban residents on the basis of their arrest history&mdash;the prohibition is too broad. A blanket prohibition of residents with a criminal conviction is also too broad since nearly one-third of the population in the United States has a criminal record of some kind or another. A prohibition on felons may be possible if done properly. HUD Guidelines . In April 2016, the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) provided a guide on applying Fair Housing Act standards to the use of criminal records by housing providers. ( HUD - Criminal History ) With some exceptions, HUD generally deems denial of housing based on criminal history as a violation of the Fair Housing Act. Although an association is not a housing provider, it is viewed as such in many instances by HUD and the courts. (Associations were found to have similar obligations to landlords regarding resident safety under Frances T. v. Village Green Owners Ass&rsquo;n (1986) 42 Cal.3d 490) As a result, HUD guidelines provide a good guide for associations to follow. [a] housing provider that imposes a blanket prohibition on any person with any conviction record&ndash;no matter when the conviction occurred, what the underlying conduct entailed, or what the convicted person has done since then&ndash;will be unable to meet this burden [that the restriction is legitimate and nondiscriminatory]. A housing provider with a more tailored policy or practice that excludes individuals with only certain types of convictions must still prove that its policy is necessary to serve a &ldquo;substantial, legitimate, nondiscriminatory interest.&rdquo; To do this, a housing provider must show that its policy accurately distinguishes between criminal conduct that indicates a demonstrable risk to resident safety and/or property and criminal conduct that does not. Accordingly, a policy or practice that fails to consider the nature, severity, and recency of criminal conduct is unlikely to be proven necessary to serve a &lsquo;substantial, legitimate, nondiscriminatory interest&rsquo; of the provider. The determination of whether any particular criminal history-based restriction on housing satisfies step two of the discriminatory effects standard must be made on a case-by-case basis. That means white-collar felons and perjurers present less risk to resident safety than recently released violent felony criminals and arsonists. Registered sex offenders, depending on the severity of the crime, present different levels of risk to be individually evaluated. Analysis of the Restriction . HUD goes through a three-step analysis when evaluating a prohibition on criminals. The plaintiff must show the criminal history policy has a discriminatory effect or disparate impact on a group of persons because of their race or national origin. The housing provider must show the policy achieves a substantial, legitimate, nondiscriminatory interest of the provider. The plaintiff must prove the interest served by the policy could be served by another less discriminatory practice. Statutory Exception . Section 807(b)(4) of the Fair Housing Act does not prohibit &ldquo;conduct against a person because such person has been convicted &hellip; of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a controlled substance&hellip;.&rdquo; So, denial of housing due to such a conviction will not result in a violation of the Fair Housing Act, regardless of any discriminatory effect. Note that the exception requires a conviction , not merely an arrest, and it does not apply to other drug-related convictions, such as drug possession. Notifying Members of the Felony&#39;s Presence . A felon&#39;s mere presence in the association does did not constitute a &ldquo;dangerous condition&rdquo; that could give rise to premises liability. When felons are admitted to probation and parole, the legal system has made a determination that they can live in society without unreasonable danger to others, even if any particular probationer may, at some time, commit another crime. In an unpublished case, the court of appeals reasoned: We are, in addition, troubled by the unlimited scope of the duty plaintiffs would impose on homeowners associations. If the duty to warn extended to all felony probationers who might, in some way, harm their neighbors, it would seem to cover at least those convicted of driving while intoxicated, financial crimes (from writing checks with insufficient funds to selling unregistered securities), and theft crimes, in addition to any crimes of violence. In the case of sex offenders, where the Legislature has established a mechanism for public disclosure of the whereabouts of repeat offenders, there is no duty to warn about the proximity of specific individuals merely because of their prior offenses. ( Wentworth v. Sierra North Village HOA ) ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login