URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/I/Injuries-on-HOA-Easements-Trails

Injuries on HOA Easements & Trails You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME I Injuries on HOA Easements & Trails Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings EASEMENTS & TRAILS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Rules &amp; Regulations Renters Pets Daycare, Drones, Flags Vehicles Clubhouse, Gym, Pool Nuisance Issues Clotheslines, Gardens, Turf &nbsp; Clubhouse Rental Gym Equipment Movies, Music &amp; Internet Playgrounds Pools &amp; Spas Trails Inflatable Bounce House Eliminating Amenities Regulating Trails AssociatIons can regulate their equestrian and hiking trails are used. They can prohibit bicycles and motorized vehicles from using them. All trails should be inspected periodically and maintained in a reasonaby safe condition.&nbsp; Associations can prohibit e-bikes on trails. The average cyclist goes about 12 mph on regular bicycles. E-bikes (electric-assisted bicycles) come in all shapes, sizes, and speeds--some can achieve speeds up to 28 miles per hour under motor assistance. Level-2 e-bikes are not limited to 20 mph. Instead, it&#39;s the speed at which the electric motor stops assisting the rider. The e-bike can still go as fast as the person can pedal. Because of the motor assist, e-bikes help cyclists maintain a higher average speed.&nbsp;One European study found that e-bike riders had much higher average speed than regular cyclists. A&nbsp; study by Reuters Health News &nbsp;found that &quot;powered bikes carry a higher risk of severe injuries than traditional bicycles.&quot;&nbsp;If an association decides e-bikes create unsafe conditions, it can restrict them from paths and trails. Your board can institute a test period with appropriate rules to see if e-bike riders create hazardous trail conditions.&nbsp; Disabled Access The Orange Park Community Association (OPCA) had a common area trail system that was accessible to residents and non-residents alike. For safety reasons, the association installed barriers at the trail&#39;s entry points to prevent vehicle access. A non-resident disabled person wanted to use a horse-drawn carriage on the trails and sued the association under the Disabled Persons Act, the Unruh Civil Rights Act, and the Americans with Disabilities Act. The court concluded the association&#39;s private trails were not transformed into public accommodations merely because the association did not actively exclude members of the public from using the trails.&nbsp;( Carolyn v. Orange Park Community Association &nbsp;(2009) 177 Cal.App.4th 1090) Recreational Immunity In general, associations are not liable for injuries that occur on equestrian and walking trails per California&rsquo;s recreational use immunity statute. ( Civ. Code &sect; 846 ) This statute provides that owners of land used for recreational purposes have no duty of care to keep the premises (trails and open space) safe for entry or use by others. Recreational purposes include hiking, nature walks, riding, as well as horseback riding.&nbsp; Horses . Miller sued the Rancho Santa Fe Association after being injured while riding her horse on a trail maintained by the association. The accident took place on the Weitzens&#39; private driveway that crossed over the trail. The court ruled against Miller. It held that Civil Code &sect; 846 protects easement owners and property owners from liability for recreational use of their property. ( Miller v. Weitzen &nbsp;(2005) 133 Cal.App.4th 732 ) Dogs . Eleven-year-old Cody was attacked by dogs and severely injured. The attack occurred on a private road&nbsp;in an association. Plaintiffs sought to expand liability from the dog&#39;s owner to the association because it held&nbsp; access easements over the road. The court declined to expand liability to the association, which did not create the hazard, did not own the dogs, had no interest in the land from which the dogs escaped, and did not own the road where the attack occurred. ( Cody v. Falletti ) Exceptions to Immunity There are exceptions to recreational immunities. Following are some examples: Unreasonable Risk of Harm . Landowners have a duty to exercise ordinary care in management of premises in order to avoid exposing persons to unreasonable risk of harm. Determination of whether a property owner owed a duty toward an injured person entails an inquiry as to whether, in the management of his or her property, the owner has acted as a reasonable person in view of the probability of injury to those in the exceptional cases. &nbsp; Aware of Concealed Conditions . If there are any latent or concealed perils on the land, the possessor is under a duty to exercise ordinary care either to make the condition reasonably safe for those coming onto the land or to give such persons a warning sufficient to enable them to avoid harm. Indeed, where the occupier of land is aware of a concealed condition involving, in the absence of precautions, an unreasonable risk of harm to those coming in contact with it, and is aware that a person on the premises is about to come in contact with it, the court can reasonably conclude that a failure to warn or to repair the condition constitutes negligence. &nbsp; Willful&nbsp; or Malicious . If there was a willful or malicious failure by an association to guard against or warn of dangerous conditions, use, structure or activity, it would likely be found liable for injuries that occurred. &nbsp; Fee to Use Trails . If an association charged people to use its trails and open space areas, it can be held to a higher standard of care. For example, a golfer was stung 50 times by a swarm of yellow jackets and almost died. Clubs have a duty to exercise reasonable care to protect patrons against the foreseeable risk posed by yellow jackets. The golf club argued it had no duty to protect golfers from insects without prior knowledge of their existence. The court found the club liable because it did not regularly inspect the grounds for pests or use any preventative measures to control yellow jackets. ( Staats v. Vintner&#39;s Golf Club, LLC ) &nbsp; Invitation to Use . An association could be found liable if it expressly invites, rather than merely permits, persons to go on the trails and open spaces. The owner of premises owes a duty to an invitee to maintain the premises in a reasonably safe condition and to warn the invitee of any dangerous condition which is actually or constructively known to him, but he is not liable for injury to the invitee which results from a condition that is obvious or should have been observed by the invitee in the exercise of reasonable care.&nbsp; An invitee is a business visitor who is invited or permitted to enter or remain on the land of another for a purpose directly or indirectly connected with business dealings between such person and the owner or possessor of the land. &nbsp; Employee Negligence . Negligence by association employees can create liability. For example, if an employee drives a vehicle negligently on the trails or open space and injures someone, the association would likely be found liable. Avoiding Liability Maintenance . With the exceptions described above, associations should not rely on recreational immunities to protect them from liability. Instead, associations should have a regular inspection and maintenance schedule for trails and open areas. If, for example, a trail has been washed out, an association should close that trail, post signs and maintain the trail. Not doing so may be construed as a willful failure to guard against dangerous use of the trail, which may be a basis of liability if someone is injured. Warning Signs . Generally, it is a good idea to post warning signs and disclaimers at the entry point of the trail as this helps to mitigate liability.&nbsp; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login