URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/I/Internal-Dispute-Resolution

Internal Dispute Resolution You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME I Internal Dispute Resolution Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings INTERNAL DISPUTE RESOLUTION Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Legal Issues Security Attorney-Client Privilege Liability Protections Internal Dispute Resolution Alternative Dispute Resolution Harassment Small Claims&nbsp; Court Attorneys&#39; Fees Artificial Intelligence Meet &amp; Confer Policy Associations must provide a &quot;fair, reasonable and expeditious&quot; procedure for resolving disputes between the association and its members. The process is referred to as &quot;Internal Dispute Resolution&quot; (IDR) or &quot;meet and confer.&quot; The elements required by the Davis-Stirling Act ( Civ. Code &sect; 5910 ;&nbsp; Civ. Code &sect; 5915 ) include the following: Request&nbsp; in Writing. &nbsp;Either &nbsp;party to the dispute may invoke the procedure. A request to invoke the procedure must be in writing. &nbsp; Prompt Deadlines . The parties shall meet promptly at a mutually convenient time and place. The procedure shall provide for prompt deadlines and state the maximum time for the association to act on a request invoking the procedure.&nbsp; &nbsp; Good Faith Effort . The parties shall explain their positions to each other and confer in good faith to resolve the dispute. &nbsp; Invoked by Owner . If a member invokes the procedure, the association must participate. &nbsp; Invoked by Association . If the association invokes the procedure, the member may choose&nbsp;not to participate. If the member participates but the dispute is resolved other than by agreement of the member, the member shall have a right of appeal to the board. &nbsp; Designate a Director . The board shall designate a director to meet and confer. &nbsp; Resolution in Writing .&nbsp;A resolution agreed to by the parties must be memorialized in writing and signed by the parties, including the board designee, on behalf of the association. &nbsp; Resolution Enforceable. A written resolution, signed by both parties, of a dispute pursuant to the procedure that does not conflict with the law or the governing documents, binds the association and is judicially enforceable. A written agreement, signed by both parties, reached pursuant to the procedure that does not conflict with the law or the governing documents, binds the parties and is judicially enforceable. &nbsp; Attorney Allowed . The procedure shall provide a means by which the member and the association may explain their positions. The member and association may be assisted by an attorney or another person in explaining their positions at their own cost. &nbsp; No Fee Allowed . The association may not charge members a fee to participate in the process. &nbsp; Annual Notice. Associations must annually notify their members of IDR and ADR dispute resolution procedures. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5920 ;&nbsp; &sect; 5965 ) CONTACT US &nbsp;for an IDR Policy Attorneys Can Participate in IDR A change in the Internal Dispute Resolution statutes that took effect January 1, 2015, allows members to bring an attorney or other person to an IDR meeting with a board member. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5910(b) ; &sect; 5915(b)(4) ) This change in the law creates risk for associations.&nbsp;The change makes no provision that owners notify the board that they intend to bring an attorney, i.e., they can ambush the board member designated to meet with them. Moreover, there is no mediation privilege. That means that anything said in IDR is not confidential and can be used against either party in subsequent litigation.&nbsp;If a homeowner brings an attorney to an IDR session, the meeting should immediately be rescheduled to a later date when the association&#39;s legal counsel can attend. The homeowner has no basis to complain about the postponement since California&#39;s Rules of Professional Conduct prohibit attorneys from communicating with parties without their legal counsel present.&nbsp;( Rule 2-100(A) ) Recommendation : Whenever a homeowner requests IDR, send a letter confirming the request and setting a date for the meeting. The letter should include language asking for advance notice if the owner intends to bring a lawyer to the meeting. Include a statement that bringing an attorney without prior notice will result in rescheduling the meeting so the association&#39;s legal counsel can attend. No Litigation During IDR An association may not file a civil action regarding a dispute in which the member has requested dispute resolution unless the association has complied with Civil Code &sect; 5910 by engaging in good faith in the internal dispute resolution procedures after a member invokes those procedures. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5910.1 ) IDR as a Form of Harassment Once an IDR has been held on an issue, boards are not required to hold repeated requests by the same owner on the same issue. A disgruntled homeowner sometimes makes repeated requests to harass boards by engaging directors in endless rounds of IDR on the same issue. Once the matter has been addressed and documented, boards can decline any further requests on that issue. Also, the issue should be such that it could lead to litigation. It should not be petty disagreements, such as how the board conducts its meetings, or the kind of flowers approved by the board, or hurt feelings when a person is not appointed to a committee. Opinions on such matters can be expressed by owners during the open forum portion of a board meeting. Election Disqualifications If a person is nominated to run for the board, but the board or the inspector of elections determines the person is not qualified to serve on the board , the person&#39;s name cannot go on the ballot. However, the associations must first give the person an opportunity to engage in internal dispute resolution. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(e) ) ADR Comparison . See Arbitration-Mediation . ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can&nbsp; contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the&nbsp; Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login