URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/I/Inspectors-of-Election

Inspectors of Election You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME I Inspectors of Election Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings INSPECTORS OF ELECTION Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Approval Defined Closing the Polls Inspector&#39;s Report Inspections &amp; Legal Challenges Director&nbsp;Elections Acclamation Other Elections Recall&nbsp; Elections Annual, Special &amp; Town Hall&nbsp;Meetings Ballots&nbsp;&amp; Proxies Inspectors of Election &nbsp; Qualifications and Nominations Candidate&nbsp; Statements Quorum Voting Rights &amp; Cumulative Voting Election Rules Inspectors of Election Below is a list of companies that serve as inspectors of election. ADAMS|STIRLING does not endorse&nbsp;any particular company. Boards of directors must do their due diligence when selecting an inspector of elections.&nbsp; Advanced Election Services 24881 Alicia Pkwy, #E347 Laguna Hills, CA&nbsp;92653 www.advancedelectionservices.com Association Professional Services 74478 Highway 111, Suite B-274 Palm Desert, CA 92260 www.aps-elections.com Ballot Bliss www.ballotbliss.com ElectionBuddy www.electionbuddy.com HOA Elections 1001 Avenida Pico, Ste. C-496 San Clemente, CA 92673 www.hoaelections.net HOA Election Experts LLC Rancho Cucamonga, CA www.hoaelectionexperts.com &nbsp; &nbsp; Liberty HOA Election Services 1900 Camden Ave. San Jose, CA 95124 www.hoaelection.com NLB Consulting and Elections 3501 East Ramon Road Palm Springs, CA 92264 www.nlbconsultingfirm.com &nbsp; Pro Elections 635 Bret Harte Lane Murphys, CA 95247 www.pro-ei.com The Inspectors of Election 2794 Loker Ave W Carlsbad, CA 92010 www.theinspectorsofelection.com The Secret Ballot 2522 Alpine Blvd. Alpine, CA 91901 www.thesecretballot.com&nbsp; Third Party Voting 197 Woodland Pkwy #104 San Marcos, CA 92069 www.thirdpartyvoting.com Independent Third Party Inspectors As provided for in Civil Code &sect; 5110(b) , inspectors of election must be independent third parties. This includes, but is not limited to, the following: a volunteer poll worker with the county registrar of voters, a licensee of the California Board of Accountancy (a CPA), a notary public, and a member of the association (who is not a member of the board of directors or a candidate for the board of directors or related to a member of the board of directors or a candidate for the board of directors). Professional Inspectors of Election. There are companies that provide professional inspector services to associations. They can be hired to prepare ballots, mail and collect ballots, and count votes. Putting an Inspector under contract does not violate the independent status of the Inspector. Civil Code &sect; 5110 provides that &quot;An independent third party may not be a person . . . who is currently employed or under contract to the association.&quot; As long as the Inspector is not currently employed by the association for other services, the board can hire the person to oversee the election. Prohibited Inspectors . Associations may not appoint or use inspectors who are: members of the board of directors, a candidate for the board of directors, related to a member of the board of directors, or anyone under contract with the association. Appointing Inspectors of Election Inspectors should be selected early in the election process.&nbsp;As provided for in&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 5105(a)(5) , associations may use one of the following methods for selecting&nbsp;Inspectors: Appointment by the board; Election by the membership. This may be a more democratic approach, but it is unwieldy and costly because it requires (a) the administrative task of recruiting multiple persons or companies willing to compete for the privilege of overseeing the association&#39;s election and (b) the cost of holding an extra election, i.e., the election of Inspectors prior to the election of directors. This creates the conundrum that electing Inspectors requires secret balloting, which requires the selection of additional inspectors to count the ballots for the election of the Inspectors. Any other method for selecting the inspector or inspectors. Because the statute mandates that inspectors of election receive and count ballots, either 1 or 3 inspectors ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(a)(5) ) must be appointed early enough in the election process so that ballots can be mailed to the inspectors or to a location designated by the inspectors. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5115(b)(2) ) Assistant Inspectors . The larger the association, the more time-consuming the ballot-counting process becomes. To speed the process, inspectors of election are allowed to appoint and oversee additional persons (as noted above) to verify signatures and to count and tabulate votes as the inspector deems appropriate, provided the persons are independent third parties. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(a)(6) ) Duties of Inspectors of Election Inspectors of election must perform their duties impartially, in good faith , to the best of their abilities, and as expeditiously as practical. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5110(d) ) Inspectors must perform the duties listed below. To help in the expeditious performance of their duties, inspectors can delegate some tasks to a person or persons, who are not inspectors of election.&nbsp;Those duties marked with a double asterisk ( ** ) may be delegated to a third party to assist the inspector, such as the association&#39;s management company. ** Determine the number of memberships entitled to vote and the voting power of each. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5110(c) ) [This is normally supplied by management to the Inspector for approval.] ** Prepare a voter list and correct any information within two business days of receiving notice of errors. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(a)(7) )&nbsp; ** Prepare a list of candidates and correct any information within two business days of receiving notice of errors. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(a)(7) )&nbsp; Designate a location for mailing ballots or delivery by hand (and provide a receipt if requested). ( Civ. Code &sect; 5115(c)(2) ) ** Deliver or cause to be delivered ballots with instructions to each member of the association. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(g)(4) ) ** Deliver election rules to each member of the association. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(g)(4) ) Receive ballots from members. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5115(b)(1) ) Verify member information and signatures on outer envelopes. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5120 ) Determine authenticity, validity, and effect of proxies. (Civ. Code &sect; 5110(c) ) Hear and determine challenges and questions. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5110(c)(4) ) Determine when the polls close. (Civ. Code &sect; 5110(c) ) Open ballots and tabulate votes. (Civ. Code &sect; 5110(c) ; &sect; 5120(a) ) Determine the results of the election. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5120(a) ) Report the results to the board. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5120(b) )&nbsp; Perform acts as may be proper to conduct the election with fairness to all members. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5110(c)(8) ) Keep custody of election materials. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5125 ) Oversee recounts. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5125 ) Make records available for legal challenges. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5125 ) Make records available for and oversee inspection during the time records are in the inspector&#39;s custody. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5205(a) ) For elections by acclamation, determine if qualified candidates are&nbsp;not more than the number of vacancies to be elected.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 5103(a) ) Prior to the Meeting . Inspectors of election or their designees may verify member information and signatures on the outer envelope prior to the meeting at which ballots are tabulated. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5120 ) Early Ballot Count . Providing members with an early ballot count is not one of the inspector&#39;s duties. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login