URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/J/Judicial-Deference

Judicial Deference You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME J Judicial Deference Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings JUDICIAL DEFERENCE DOCTRINE Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Judicial Deference Defined Judicial Deference, or the &quot; business judgment doctrine ,&quot; is the principle under which courts will defer to a board&#39;s business decisions even if a reasonable person would have acted differently. The common law business judgment rule refers to a judicial policy of deference to the business judgment of corporate directors in the exercise of their broad discretion in making corporate decisions. . . . Under this rule, a director is not liable for a mistake in business judgment made in good faith and in what he or she believes to be the corporation&#39;s best interests, where no conflict of interest exists. ( Gaillard v. Natomas Co . (1989) 208 Cal.App.3d 1250, 1263) Case Law Regarding Judicial Deference The issue of judicial reference has been applied in a number of cases involving community associations. The judicial deference rule applies to an association board&rsquo;s discretionary decisions&nbsp;concerning the operation of the common interest development.&nbsp;( Eith v. Ketelhut (2018).) Nothing in Lamden limits judicial deference to maintenance decisions. Deference applies to the board&#39;s authority to adopt rules and impose fees relating to short-term rentals.&nbsp; ( Watts v. Oak Shores (2015).) Judicial deference applies to decisions involving the board&#39;s authority to maintain, control, and manage the common areas, i.e.,&nbsp;its designated storage space in a common area. ( Harvey v. Landing (2008).) An association&nbsp; can &nbsp;select among means for remedying violations of the CC&amp;Rs without resorting to expensive and time-consuming litigation, and the courts should defer to that discretion . ( Haley v. Casa Del Rey (2007).) An association has a corollary, fiduciary relationship &nbsp;with its members. Its actions must be undertaken in good faith , considering the best interests of the community association and its members and seeking professional advice where necessary ( Berryman v. Merit ( 2007).) Deference was given to a board&#39;s decision denying an owner&#39;s application for a room addition on aesthetic grounds--its approval or rejection of a homeowner&rsquo;s improvement plan.&nbsp; ( Dolan-King v. Ranch Santa Fe (2000).) So long as a homeowners&rsquo; association acts upon reasonable investigation, in good faith , and in a manner the association reasonably believes to be in the best interests of the association and its members, its decision will be upheld. ( Lamden v. La Jolla Shores (1999).) Generally, courts will uphold decisions made by the governing board of an owners association so long as they represent good faith efforts to further the purposes of the common interest development, are consistent with the development&#39;s governing documents, and comply with public policy. ( Nahrstedt v. Lakeside Village (1994).) Burden of Proof . The burden of proof is on an objecting homeowner to show that an association&rsquo;s decision is arbitrary , imposes burdens on the use of lands it affects that substantially outweigh the restriction&#39;s benefits to the development&#39;s residents, or violates a fundamental public policy.&quot; ( Nahrstedt , 8 Cal.4th at 361, 386; Cohen , 142 Cal.App.3d at 642, 651-654.) In this regard, &quot;courts do not conduct a case-by-case analysis of the restrictions to determine the effect on an individual homeowner; [instead they] consider the reasonableness of the restrictions by looking at the goals and concerns of the entire development.&quot; ( Dolan-King , 81 Cal.App.4th at 965, 975.) Presumption Favors Decision . The business judgment rule &quot;sets up a presumption that directors&#39; decisions are based on sound business judgment. This presumption can be rebutted only by a factual showing of fraud, bad faith, or gross overreaching.&quot; ( Eldridge v. Tymshare, Inc. (1986) 186 Cal.App.3d 767, 776.) [N]either a court nor minority shareholders can substitute their business judgment for that of a corporation where its board of directors has acted in good faith and with a view to the best interests of the corporation and all its shareholders. The power to manage the affairs of a corporation is vested in the board of directors.... Every presumption is in favor of the good faith of the directors. Interference with such discretion is not warranted in doubtful cases. ( Beehan v. Lido Isle Community Assn (1977) 70 Cal.App.3d 858, 865.) A mistake of judgment on the part of a board of directors does not justify taking the control of corporate affairs from the board of directors and placing it with the stockholders. The board of directors may make incorrect decisions, as well as correct ones, so long as it is faithful to the corporation and uses its best business judgment. ( Beehan v. Lido Isle .) When Judicial Deference Does Not Apply Judicial deference does not apply to all board decisions. The courts have published decisions outlining where the rule does not apply. The rule of judicial deference does not apply to a board&#39;s improper construction of the governing documents. ( Dover Village Assn. v. Jennison (2010) 191 Cal.App.4th 123, 130.) Courts do not defer to a board&rsquo;s interpretation of the CC&amp;Rs. Interpretation is a legal question to be decided by the courts, not the board. ( Eith v. Ketelhut (2018).) Deference is limited where responsibility for repairs is unclear. ( Dover Village v. Jennison (2010).) Deference does not apply where a board fails to investigate and make a repair decision. ( Affan v. Portofino Cove (2010).) Deference does not apply where a board makes decisions contrary to the governing documents. ( Ekstrom v. Marquesa (2008).) It is limited where the board fails to enforce the governing documents. ( Nahrstedt v. Lakeside Village (1994); Lamden v. La Jolla Shores (1999); Dolan-King v. Rancho Santa Fe (2000).) Notwithstanding the deference to a director&#39;s business judgment, the rule does not immunize a director from liability in the case of his or her abdication of corporate responsibilities: ... When courts say that they will not interfere in matters of business judgment, it is presupposed that judgment -- reasonable diligence -- has in fact been exercised. A director cannot close his eyes to what is going on about him in the conduct of the business of the corporation and have it said that he is exercising business judgment. Courts have properly decided to give directors a wide latitude in the management of the affairs of a corporation provided always that judgment, and that means an honest, unbiased judgment, is reasonably exercised by them. ( Burt v. Irvine Co . (1965) 237 Cal. App. 2d 828, 852-853.) Rules &amp; Regulations . Although rules and regulations enacted by the board of a homeowners&rsquo; association are not recorded, they are entitled to similar judicial deference. &ldquo;[W]here a duly constituted community association board, upon reasonable investigation, in good faith and with regard for the best interests of the community association and its members, exercises discretion within the scope of its authority under relevant statutes, covenants, and restrictions to select among means for discharging an obligation to maintain and repair a development&rsquo;s common areas, courts should defer to the board&rsquo;s authority and presumed expertise.&rdquo; ( Lamden v. La Jolla Shores , (1999)&nbsp; 21 Cal.4th 249, 265.) Business Judgment Rule . A related doctrine is the Business Judgment Rule . ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login