URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/L/Liability-for-Criminal-Activity

Liability for Criminal Activity You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME L Liability for Criminal Activity Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings LIABILITY FOR CRIMINAL ACTIVITY & NEIGHBOR DISPUTES Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Legal Issues Security Security&nbsp;Liability Security&nbsp; Cameras Census&nbsp;Takers Sex Offenders Firearms Felonies &amp; Misdemeanors Village Green Crimewave Lighting . Lighting in vulnerable common areas is an important deterrent to crime. If a board is on notice that existing lighting needs repair and injuries or assaults have occurred because of their failure to repair or install lighting, the association could be liable.&nbsp;In the Village Green Owners Association, a young woman installed exterior security lights after her condo was burglarized. Even though the board was aware of criminal activity in the development, she was ordered to remove the lighting because it had not been approved by the board. She complied and disconnected her lights. That night, an unidentified person entered her unit under the cover of darkness and raped and robbed her. She sued the board of directors and won.&nbsp;( Frances T. v. Village Green ) Foreseeable Criminal Acts Even though boards are normally not responsible for the criminal acts of others, the Supreme Court held that directors can be held liable for their own negligence. The Court concluded that associations and members have a relationship requiring boards to exercise reasonable care to protect residents from foreseeable harm. The court found the following points relevant: The association was on notice that crimes were being committed against residents. Correspondence from the&nbsp;plaintiff and other residents, along with the articles in the association&#39;s newsletter, demonstrated that the board was aware of the link between the lack of lighting and crime. &nbsp; The plaintiff&#39;s unit had been recently burglarized, and the board knew this. It is not necessary that the prior crimes be identical to the ones actually perpetrated against a resident. To create liability, boards need not foresee the precise injury to a resident, only that the possibility of this type of harm is foreseeable.&nbsp;Duty is an essential element of negligence. Duty may be imposed by law, be assumed by the defendant, or exist by virtue of a special relationship. The existence of a legal duty depends upon the foreseeability of the risk. ( Melton v. Boustred (2010) 183 Cal.App.4th 521, 529) Associations have a duty to protect residents from the foreseeable criminal acts of others in those areas under their control. Liability for security breaches depends on foreseeability and the circumstances. In Titus v. Canyon Lake Property Owners Association , the court examined whether an association was liable for injuries sustained as a result of a fatal traffic accident in its gated community. A resident of Canyon Lake POA was killed when he was a passenger in a car driven by an intoxicated driver. The victim&#39;s daughter sued the association, claiming it had a duty to protect her father from the drunk driver. She claimed the CC&amp;Rs created an affirmative duty to provide a safe and secure environment in the community, which obligated the association to stop the intoxicated driver from using the association&#39;s private streets. She argued that: [The Association] owns, maintains, and operates the common areas and facilities, including streets, within the Community. Pursuant to its bylaws, [the Association] is &quot;charged with &#39;doing whatever is necessary, conducive, incidental or advisable to accomplish and promote its object and purposes.&#39;&quot; Its &quot;object&quot; is to &quot;promote the common interest and welfare of its members.&quot; Among its purposes is to &quot;preserve, protect and police&quot; the common facilities. The court disagreed. It held that, in general, persons are not liable for the conduct of third parties without the existence of a &quot;special relationship&quot; that would create a duty. Some of the factors used to determine if a special relationship exists include the following: Whether there is a &quot;high degree of foreseeability&quot; that an accident will occur.&nbsp; Whether the association encouraged or had some involvement in the incident (in this case, the driver&#39;s intoxication). Whether the association (i) intended or planned the harmful result; (ii) had actual or constructive knowledge of the harmful consequences of their behavior; (iii) acted in bad faith or with reckless indifference to the results of their conduct; or (iv) engaged in inherently harmful acts. The court found that the association did not make any promises upon which the victim relied,&nbsp;nor did it create the situation that led to the accident. The court concluded that the connection between the association and the victim was remote, and no special relationship existed sufficient to create liability. Neighbor-to-Neighbor Disputes &nbsp; Neighbors in a condominium association had a long-running dispute that ended in a physical altercation and injuries. The injured parties sued the management company and the HOA, alleging negligence by both for not doing something to prevent the dispute. The association and management argued that they did not owe a duty to contact the police or intervene in the dispute. In a published&nbsp;decision, the Court of Appeals agreed and noted that imposing a duty on homeowner associations or their managing agents to intervene and resolve disputes between homeowners would place an untenable burden on them.&nbsp;The Court observed that associations are run by volunteers and do not have police powers or subpoena power. They cannot compel owners or tenants to sit down and work out their differences. Imposing such duties would leave associations liable for the outcome of such disputes without the tools to prevent them.&nbsp;A homeowner association&#39;s standard of care is to investigate rule violations and take appropriate action. It does not include mediating, de-escalating, or resolving disputes between neighbors. ( Woolard v. Regent Real Estate Services ) Ways to Increase Security The actions an association can take are many and varied. Following are some of the steps that can be taken to lessen crime in a development: Police . Involve the local police and federal drug enforcement agencies in stepped-up patrols and community meetings. Neighborhood Watch . Set up a Neighborhood Watch program with volunteers walking the neighborhood and reporting suspicious activity. Lighting . Add more&nbsp; lighting &nbsp;around the community. Walls &amp; Fences . Where appropriate, add walls and fences around the community to limit access to the development. If feasible, gate the community. Cameras . Install&nbsp; security cameras &nbsp;to monitor entries, exits, and common area elements of the community. Security Company . Hire a security company to patrol the property. Security Keys . Switch from regular keys that can be copied and distributed by owners and tenants to friends and family to computer-operated key fobs and smart cards. When fobs and smart cards are lost, they can be deactivated. This provides tighter controls over who can access the community and a record of who accessed areas where criminal activity may be occurring. Legal Action . Where appropriate, take legal action against owners with problem tenants who violate the governing documents. Foreclosure . Foreclose on delinquent owners. Owner Diligence . Regularly remind residents&nbsp;with a disclaimer&nbsp;that they must also take reasonable care to protect themselves from harm. When appropriate, remind them to check the&nbsp; Megan&#39;s Law &nbsp;database. Newsletter . Report criminal activity to the membership via the association&#39;s newsletter so members are aware of the threat and can take appropriate measures to protect themselves. Annual Disclaimer Boards of directors should take care not to make statements that could be interpreted as promises to the membership of their safety and security. To minimize potential liability, boards should encourage members to be vigilant in their own security. To that end, boards should include in their annual mailings to the membership a security disclaimer similar to the following: SECURITY DISCLAIMER .&nbsp; We hope that our security systems provide some deterrence to crime. However, the association can never be crime-free. For example, it is possible for someone to enter the property under false pretenses to commit crimes, for residents to commit crimes against their own neighbors, for guests of residents to commit crimes, and for employees to commit crimes.&nbsp;As a result, the association cannot guarantee your security.&nbsp;You should NOT rely on the association to protect you from loss or harm. You should provide for your own security by keeping your doors locked, refusing to open your door to strangers, asking workmen for identification, installing a security system, carrying insurance, etc. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login