URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/L/Loans-to-Associations

Loans to Associations You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME L Loans to Associations Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings BANK LOANS TO ASSOCIATIONS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Annual Budgets Collections Audits & Reviews Bank Accounts & Loans Reserves Taxes Bank Accounts Loans to Associations Insuring & Investing Funds Authority to Borrow Associations sometimes need to borrow money for special projects. These can include capital improvements such as building fences where none existed before or making repairs required where there are insufficient reserves to cover the cost. The authority for associations to borrow money is generally found in their governing documents (bylaws or CC&Rs). It can also be found in Corp. Code ยง 7140(i) , which allows corporations to obtain bank loans subject to any limitations in the governing documents. Collateral for Bank Loans Directors should never personally guarantee loans made to the association--directors are volunteers and should not be putting their assets at risk for such loans. For bank loans to associations, banks require a different form of collateral. Most often, it's a special assessment approved by the membership that serves as collateral. ( Civ. Code ยง 5735 ) If, for some reason, the association defaults on the loan, the lender can step into the shoes of the association and pursue payment from the membership. If the bank requires a lien to be recorded against the common areas as security, it means the bank is unfamiliar with how associations work, and the board should contact other lenders. Membership Approval Check your documents before you apply for the loan. Membership approval of the special assessment (for capital improvement, repairing the common areas, etc.) may not be enough. The ballot may also require approval authorizing the board to enter into a loan agreement with a bank. Loan Checklist The following are issues that boards need to be aware of: Term . The term for bank loans is generally 3, 5, 7, 10, or 15 years, depending on the size of the loan. Credit Metrics . Before approving a loan, banks look at the association's (i) owner delinquencies, (ii) cash balances, (iii) percentage of renters, (iv) reserves, and other factors that may affect the stability of the association and its ability to repay the loan. Collateral for the Loan . Generally, a special assessment approved by the membership serves as collateral for the loan. Board members should never personally guarantee the loan. Application Fees . Some banks charge application fees; some do not. You should ask before you apply. Bank Deposits . Sometimes, banks require associations to move their operating and reserve funds to their bank as part of the loan approval terms. Financial Statements . Associations must provide financial statements and disclose delinquencies. If your association has high delinquencies and fails to comply with statutory requirements for annual financial statements , it is unlikely you will be approved for a loan. Good Standing . Associations must be in "good standing" with the Secretary of State before getting a loan. That means filing income tax returns and paying taxes. Boards can check their status online with the Secretary of State before initiating the application process. Insurance . Lenders sometimes ask about the association's insurance. Boards should check with the association's insurance broker to ensure their insurance meets or exceeds statutory and CC&R requirements. Authority . Boards will likely need authority in their documents to borrow or get approval from the membership. Attorney Opinion Letter . Banks usually require an opinion letter from the association's attorney as part of the loan approval process. Some require review by the lender's legal counsel rather than the association's. Boards should involve their HOA attorney from the outset to advise them about the approval process and to prepare the ballot for the membership if needed. Your attorney must provide an opinion about the association's authority to borrow. Prepayment Penalties . Will the loan have prepayment penalties? Avoid them if you can. The board may also need to set a policy regarding owners' prepayment upon the sale of their units. Prepayment Issues If prepayment is allowed without penalties, does it reduce the loan term or reamortize it? You want it to reamortize the loan so that loan payments are reduced. This issue will become important as units are sold. Frequently, buyers want the seller to pay off their portion of the special assessment so the buyer will not have to make payments. Reamortize? Boards have discovered that prepayments create problems if the loan does not reamortize, since the association must continue making the same loan payments to the bank but with less money from the membership for that purpose. This results in operational funds being diverted to the loan payments, which, in turn, results in higher assessments for everyone as the board is forced to increase dues to cover the shortfall. Adopt Policies . To avoid this problem, boards can adopt a policy against member prepayments and require buyers to assume the seller's assessment payments. To adjust for this, buyers and sellers can negotiate arrangements between themselves, such as lowering the purchase price by the amount of the special assessment or leaving that amount on the table for buyers to use as they wish. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login