URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/M/Megans-Law-Defined

Megan's Law Defined You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME M Megan's Law Defined Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings MEGAN'S LAW Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Legal Issues Security Security&nbsp;Liability Security&nbsp; Cameras Census&nbsp;Takers Sex Offenders Firearms Felonies &amp; Misdemeanors Megan&#39;s Law is named after a seven-year-old girl who was raped and murdered by a child molester who had moved across the street from her family. The crime triggered the passage of Megan&#39;s laws in a number of states including California to provide the public with information on the whereabouts of dangerous sex offenders. Database of Offenders California has a database of registered sex offenders available for public viewing on the internet. Searches can be done by an offender&#39;s name, or by city, zip or within a predetermined radius of a selected park, address or school. Once an offender has been located, his or her picture is displayed, as is the person&#39;s present address, offenses, known aliases and any distinguishing scars, marks and tattoos. The information is available at www.meganslaw.ca.gov . Offender Classification . There are different levels of sex offenders. The classification depends on the crime committed, the age of the parties involved, and the person&#39;s propensity to commit additional offenses. Following is a summary of&nbsp; California&#39;s classification system: Tier I Sex Offenses . Public indecency, voyeurism, possession of child pornography, and sexual contact without consent. Tier II Sex Offenses. Trafficking of minors for the purposes of sexual activity; sexual contact or acts with persons between the ages of 12-15; sexual offenses where the offender has a position of authority over the victim (parent, guardian, babysitter, teacher); and the production or distribution of pornography that includes minors. Tier III Sex Offenses . Sex acts where force was used; sex acts where the victim is rendered unconscious or impaired through the use of drugs or alcohol; and sexual acts where the victim is under the age of 12. Disclosure to Membership Duty to Disclose? &nbsp;Although board members are fiduciaries, there does not appear to be a duty by directors to disclose the presence of registered sex offenders in the association. Not all sex offenders are dangerous.&nbsp; The law has created protections for offenders who have &quot;paid their debt&quot; to society. The only time disclosure is allowed is to protect persons at risk. Moreover, the disclosure must not be for the purpose of discriminating against or harassing the registered offender. Impermissible disclosures could lead to criminal prosecution and civil liability for directors. One unpublished case addressed the disclosure issue in a footnote: FN2. ...In the case of sex offenders, where the Legislature has established a mechanism for public disclosure of the whereabouts of repeat offenders, there is no duty to warn about the proximity of specific individuals merely because of their prior offenses. ( Civ. Code, &sect; 2079.10a, subd. (b) ; Wentworth v. Sierra North Village HOA ) Notice to Membership . Regarding notice to the membership, boards have several options, depending on the circumstances and the degree of risk they are willing to assume. Make No Disclosure . Boards could elect not to mention the presence of a registered sex offender. This avoids any potential liability that may arise from improper use of the information, improper notification, or mistaken identification. However, if a child in the association is molested by that person, the parties involved might sue the board for failing to notify the membership of the potential danger. Direct Members to the Website . Boards could include a notice in the association&#39;s newsletter about the Megan&#39;s Law website. The board would make no comment about a registered offender living in the association; it would simply encourage members to examine the website. Contact the Police Department . Directors could contact the local law enforcement agency and ask it to give notice to the membership. The advantage is the board&#39;s avoidance of potential liability for giving improper notice. The disadvantage is the agency may refuse to give notice. Disclose Identity and Address . This option should NOT be exercised without advice of counsel. It may put the board in violation of statute and it creates potential for defamation since the information on the State&#39;s website may not be accurate. The board&#39;s action will depend on the seriousness of the threat. Boards should seek counsel before taking any action. Serving on the Board Serve on the Board . Beginning January 1, 2020, associations can no longer prohibit registered sex offenders or felons from serving on their boards of directors unless they affect the association&#39;s ability to obtain a fidelity bond. A bill sponsored by Marjorie Murray&#39;s Center for California Homeowner Association Law (CCHAL) voided all candidate qualifications for homeowner associations in California, except those allowed by their bill. (See Candidate Qualifications )&nbsp; Amend CC&amp;Rs . Associations that wish to amend their CC&amp;Rs to prohibit high risk sex offenders from living in the development must take into consideration California&#39;s Penal Code &sect;290.46 which makes it clear that Megan&#39;s Law is not intended to punish registered sex offenders and specifically prohibits using their status to harass or commit any crime against them. Specifically, a person&#39;s status as a registered sex offender cannot be used against their: Health insurance Insurance Loans Credit Employment Education, scholarships, or fellowships Housing or accommodations Benefits, privileges, or services provided by any business establishment Doing so could make someone liable for damages, attorney&#39;s fees and fines up to $25,000. (Pen. Code &sect; 290.46(l)) Recommendation : Regardless of the option chosen above (in consultation with legal counsel), boards should consider putting a standard notice in their newsletters that would appear in all future newsletters. The notice should be generic and state something similar to the following: &quot;For information on registered sex offenders, visit www.meganslaw.ca.gov . ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login