URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/M/Mechanics-Liens

Mechanics' Liens You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME M Mechanics' Liens Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings MECHANIC'S LIENS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Contractor Issues Developer Issues Contractors Bidding&nbsp;&nbsp;Policy Contract&nbsp;Formation Construction Managers Warranties Surety Bonds Mechanic&#39;s Liens Building Permits California gives payment priority to properly licensed contractors and material suppliers who are not paid for the work they perform. If unpaid, they are allowed to file a mechanics&#39; lien against the property that benefited from their work or materials. When mechanics liens are filed against associations, owners will have difficulty refinancing and/or selling their homes. Following is a general outline of the procedure for recording mechanics&#39; liens. Process for Recording a Lien 1.&nbsp; Preliminary 20-day Notice . Before recording a lien, a preliminary 20-day notice must be served on the association.&nbsp;The notice must be served before recording a lien and not later than 20 days after the actual date of construction begins, and must contain the following information: A general description of the labor, services, and equipment to be furnished. The name and address of the person providing the services. The name of the person who contracted for the purchase of the materials or services. A description of the job site sufficient for identification. Notice to Property Owner (in boldface type) of potential liens which might result from the owner&#39;s failure to pay. 2 . &nbsp; Service of Notice . The notice may be served by delivering the notice personally or by first class registered or certified mail to the association&#39;s management office, address shown on building permit, or the address shown on the construction trust deed. If served by mail, the person filing the lien must prepare a &quot;Proof of Service&quot; accompanied by either the return receipt of certified or registered mail, or by a photocopy of the record of delivery and receipt maintained by the post office, showing the date of delivery and to whom delivered, or, in the event of non-delivery, by the returned envelope. &nbsp; If served personally, the person filing the lien must prepare a &quot;Proof of Service&quot; showing the time, place, and manner of service, facts showing that service was made in accordance with the statute, and the name and address of the person on whom a copy of the preliminary notice was served and, if appropriate, the title or capacity in which he or she was served. 3 .&nbsp; Claim of Lien . The claim of lien is a written statement containing the following information: A statement of the demand after deducting all just credits and offsets; The name of the association; A general statement of the kind of services furnished; A description of the site sufficient for identification. 4.&nbsp; Recordation . A lien may be recorded in the office of the county recorder where the property is located after furnishing services and before the expiration of: 90 days after the completion of work of improvement if no notice of completion or cessation has been recorded; 60 days after a notice of completion or notice of cessation has been recorded if you are in direct contract with the owner or 30 days if your contract is with someone other than the owner; or 10 days after a notice of completion if the work of improvement is accomplished through the use of two or more original contracts. Filing Suit to Foreclose - Recording Notice of Lis Pendens No lien binds any property for longer than 90 days after the recording of the claim of lien, unless within that time an action to foreclose the lien is commenced in a proper court. As soon as the complaint to foreclose the lien is filed, you must record a notice of the pendency of the action (notice of lis pendens ) with the county recorder. Release of Lien Once the matter has been resolved with the contractor, the mechanics&#39; lien is removed by filing a release of lien with the county recorder&#39;s office where the original lien was filed. Protection for Associations The Davis-Stirling Act prohibits a mechanics lien from being filed against another owner in common interest developments unless that consent was provided or that request was made, except in the case of emergency repairs. Members can remove their units from a lien against two or more separate interests by either paying to the holder of the lien the fraction of the total sum secured by lien that is attributable to the owner&rsquo;s separate interest or recording a lien release bond. The Act also deems the association to be an agent of the membership with respect to a work of improvement on a common area for all notices and claims required pursuant to existing law relating to works of improvement. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4615 .) Recommendation : Whenever dealing with contractors for work in the association&#39;s common areas, boards should have a written agreement with the contractor and should have the terms reviewed by legal counsel before signing it. If a mechanics lien is recorded against the association, boards should immediately contact legal counsel. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login