URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/M/Managers-Practicing-Law

Managers Practicing Law You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME M Managers Practicing Law Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings MANAGERS PRACTICING LAW Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Boards of Directors Board Meetings Committees Management Managing&nbsp;Agents Licensing&nbsp; and Disclosures Certification&nbsp;and&nbsp;Ethics Practicing Law Employee vs Independent&nbsp;Contractor Industry&nbsp;Organizations Practice of Law Defined Managers are often knowledgeable when it comes to the law, which makes them invaluable to associations. Their experience and knowledge give them the ability to spot problems and sound warnings when boards stray into areas of risk. But, managers can only raise red flags; they cannot give legal advice or engage in the practice of law.&nbsp;California has an expansive standard for defining the practice of law. It does so to protect citizens from the damage and wrongs committed by unlicensed practitioners. California broadly defines the &quot;practice of law&quot; as dispensing legal advice or service, even if the advice or service does not relate to any matter pending before a court. ( Mickel v. Murphy (1957) 147 Cal.App.2d 718, 721) California&#39;s Office of the Attorney General deems the unlicensed practice of law as a form of fraud, and those engaged in it can be criminally prosecuted. Business and Professions Code &sect; 6126(a) was amended in 2003 to stiffen the penalties for those who dispense legal advice without a license: Any person . . . practicing law who is not an active member of the State Bar . . . is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by up to one year in a county jail or by a fine of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both that fine and imprisonment. California does not yet have case law involving CID managers. Florida, however, has spoken to the issue. The Florida Supreme Court determined that the following actions by association managers are examples of the unlicensed practice of law: Determining unit owners&rsquo; voting rights, Drafting proxies , Determining use restrictions, including restrictions on leasing of units, Determining whether membership in a master or recreational facilities association is mandatory and, if so, what fees are to be charged per unit type, Preparing and filing liens against owners for delinquent assessments, Advising boards regarding the timing, method, and type of notice required for association corporate action, Advising boards what vote is needed to take association action, Advising boards on how to or whether they can reject a sale or exercise a right of first refusal, and Advising boards how the statutes pertain to them or what actions would violate the law or the governing documents. (See Supreme Court opinion ) Unauthorized Practice of Law Many managers engage in the practice of law without realizing it. Based on the guidelines established by the Florida Supreme Court, the following are examples of what a California court would likely deem the unauthorized practice of law by managers: 1.&nbsp; Advising Boards About Rights, Duties and Liabilities . That includes but is not limited to: Proper handling of recall elections, Voting rights and requirements in election disputes, Borrowing from reserves, Emergency assessments, Proper collection procedures, Interpreting the Davis-Stirling Act, ADA compliance issues, Interpretation of contract provisions, Disputed maintenance and repair issues, Disputed water damage and mold issues, and Settlement issues. 2.&nbsp; Preparing Documents That Alter Rights, Duties and Liabilities . Managers and management companies can prepare documents that are incidental to the regular course of their business. Legal counsel must prepare anything beyond that. That includes but is not limited to: Amendments to CC&amp;Rs, Bylaws, and Articles of Incorporation, Contracts and contract provisions ( People v. Merchants Protective Corp 189 Cal. 531 (Cal. 1922)), Collection policies, Election rules, Rules enforcement policies, Settlement agreements, and Hold harmless and indemnity agreements. 3.&nbsp; Using Attorney Work Product . Managers sometimes use work product prepared by a law firm for one association and modify it for use by other associations. This is also the unauthorized practice of law. It can also lead to errors since the work product was specific for a particular association and may not be appropriate for other associations. Paralegals . Not even paralegals who are trained in the law and work under the supervision of a lawyer are allowed to practice law. As provided for Business &amp; Professions Code &sect; 6450(b), a paralegal cannot do any of the following: Provide legal advice, Represent a client in court, Select, explain, draft, or recommend the use of any legal document to or for any person other than the attorney who directs and supervises the paralegal and Engage in conduct that constitutes the unlawful practice of law. No Insurance Protection for Unauthorized Practice of Law Because the unlicensed practice of law is a crime, insurance will not protect a manager from prosecution for such activity. As provided for in Civil Code &sect; 2773 , &quot;An agreement to indemnify a person against an act after that to be done, is void if the act is known by such person at the time of doing it to be unlawful.&quot; For example, if you intentionally set your house on fire, don&#39;t expect your insurance company to pay for it. The same applies to dispensing legal advice. If a manager dispenses legal advice and the association is damaged, an insurance company owes no coverage or defense for acts or damage arising out of any illegal act committed by or at the direction of an insured. ( 20th Century Ins. Co. v. Stewart (1998) 63 Cal.App.4th 1333) No Indemnity Protection . The statute cited above also affects management agreements. An indemnity provision in a management contract will not protect a manager from fines and jail time nor will it protect him from lawsuits by third parties or&nbsp; the association&nbsp;regarding &nbsp;the unlicensed practice of law. Violation of the BJR . The hourly rates for HOA lawyers typically range from $175 to $350, whereas legal advice from a manager is free. Understandably, boards would try to save money by seeking free legal counsel from their managers. However, doing so exposes directors to significant risk. By statute, directors are protected from personal liability for errors in judgment if they follow the Business Judgment Rule (BJR), which requires that decisions by directors be: In good faith , In a manner that the director believes to be in the best interests of the corporation, and With such care, including reasonable inquiry, as an ordinarily prudent person in a like position would use under similar circumstances. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7231(c) ) If a board relies on legal counsel from a manager and things go awry, directors will have difficulty convincing a jury that seeking legal advice from a manager was prudent. Recommendation : Managers often have enough training to recognize when boards stray into areas of legal peril. When that happens, they should alert directors to the danger and advise them to seek legal counsel. Boards should not put themselves and their managers at risk by pressing their managers for legal advice. It is not fair to the manager and potentially costly to the association and its directors. When asked for legal advice, a manager should always recommend the board seek legal counsel. Doing so protects both the manager and the board. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login