URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/M/Membership-Lists

Membership Lists You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME M Membership Lists Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings MEMBERSHIP LIST Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Member&#39;s Right to&nbsp;Inspect Director&#39;s&nbsp; Right to Inspect Records Retention Membership&nbsp; List Employee Salaries &amp; Records Member Contact Information Corporations must keep a record of their members , with their names and addresses. ( Corp. Code &sect; 8320(a) )&nbsp;Members must, on an annual basis, provide their contact information to their associations. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4041 ) The information is used for sending notices and disclosures to members and goes into forming a&nbsp;membership list.&nbsp;Associations, in turn, must annually provide written notice to the membership of their obligation to provide the following information: The address or addresses to which notices from the association are to be delivered. &nbsp; An alternate or secondary address to which notices from the association are to be delivered. The name and address of a legal representative who can be contacted during the owner&rsquo;s extended absence. Whether the separate interest is owner-occupied, rented out, or vacant. If an owner fails to provide contact information, the property address in the development is deemed the address to which notices are delivered. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4041 ) Right to Review &amp; Copy . Members can inspect and copy the association&#39;s membership list. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5200 &nbsp;and &sect; 5205 )&nbsp;A membership list is defined to include a member&#39;s name, property address, mailing address, and email address but not including information for members who have opted out according to Civil Code &sect; 5220. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5200(a)(9) ) Telephone Numbers .&nbsp;The right to a membership list does not include the right to phone numbers. The member list only includes members&#39; names, property addresses,&nbsp;mailing addresses, and email addresses. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5200(a)(9) )&nbsp;The exception is if the association&#39;s governing documents require that phone numbers be included with the membership list.&nbsp; Email Addresses . Beginning January 1, 2020, members&#39; email addresses, which are officially made available to an association, must be added to the membership list information.&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 5200 &nbsp;defines &quot;Association records&quot; to include membership lists with email addresses.&nbsp;With the steady increase in junk email, identity theft, malware, and hacking, most owners do not want their email addresses made public without their permission. Fortunately, the Davis-Stirling Act allows members to&nbsp;opt out of the membership list&nbsp;(see below).&nbsp; Opting Out of the Membership List Although Corporations Code &sect; 8330(c) allows withholding the entire membership list if the association provides an alternate means of communication, the statute was modified by the legislature so that associations can no longer withhold the list. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5200(a)(9) &nbsp;and &sect; 5205 )&nbsp;However, members retain the right to opt out of the list. A member of the association may opt out of the sharing of that member&#39;s name, property address, and mailing address by notifying the association in writing that the memver prefers to be contacted via the alternative process described in subdivision (c) of Section 8330 of the Corporations Code. This opt-out shall remain in effect until changed by the member. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5220 ) Alternative Methods for Contact . Opting out does not mean owners are immune from contact with other members. The statute that allows opting out also provides that the association must provide an alternative means for contacting members. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5220 ) Following are three options for handling communications with members who opt out of the membership list: HOA Applies Labels . Members who want to mail a letter to opt-out members can deliver their letter&nbsp;to the association in sealed envelopes with postage already applied. The association (or its management company) then applies mailing labels to the envelopes and drops them in the mail. Mailing House . A complete mailing list of all members (including opt-out members) could be provided by the association to an independent printer/mailer. A member who wants to mail a letter to all other members takes it to the company, which then applies mailing labels and mails it to everyone. Or, in the alternative, prints the letter, puts it in envelopes, applies mailing labels and postage, and drops it in the mail. It depends on the level of service offered by the company. &nbsp; Email . Members who want to email opt-out members can send the email to the association. The association (or its management company) will forward the email to the members who have opted out and indicate which member authored the email.&nbsp; Producing the List Copy Costs . Associations can bill the requesting member for the direct and actual cost of copying the membership list. Associations must inform the member of the costs before copying the requested documents. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5205(f) ) Deadline for Producing . Upon five days&#39; written demand, members can&nbsp;inspect the membership list&nbsp;at reasonable times. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5210(b) ) Purpose of the&nbsp;Request . The member requesting the list shall state the purpose for the request, which purpose shall be reasonably related to the requester&#39;s interest as a member.&nbsp;For example, a member cannot request the list, so he/she can solicit real estate listings. If the board reasonably believes that the information in the list will be used for another purpose, it may deny the member access to the list. If the request is denied, in any subsequent action brought by the member against&nbsp;the association, the association will&nbsp;have the burden to prove that the member would have used the information for purposes unrelated to his interest as a member. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5225 ) A corporation has the burden of proving that the member will allow use of the information for purposes unrelated to the person&rsquo;s interest as a member. ...Mere speculation that the member will use the information for an improper purpose is not sufficient to nullify inspection rights; any suspicion must be based on adequate facts in order to justify denial of inspection. ( Tract No. 7260 Association, Inc. v. Parker , internal cites deleted) Mailing Labels &amp; Delinquent Owners . Members do not have the right to demand that the association print the membership list as mailing labels, nor do they have the right to demand that delinquent owners be identified on the list. Some associations keep their list in a form that can be used to print mailing labels, and the association can but is not required to present the list in that form to an owner. Corporate Asset A membership list is a corporate asset. ( Corp. Code &sect; 8338(a) ) Without the consent of the board, a membership list may not be: Used to solicit money or property unless such money or property will be used solely to solicit the vote of the members in an election to be held by their corporation. Used for any purpose which the user does not reasonably and in good faith believe will benefit the corporation. Used for any commercial purpose or purpose in competition with the corporation. Sold to or purchased by any person. Penalty for Misuse . Any person who misuses a membership list is liable for any damage caused by its&nbsp;misuse, including punitive damages for fraudulent or malicious misuse. ( Corp. Code &sect; 8338(b) ) Denial of Request . If a demand is made by a single member and the association believes the demand is for an improper purpose, the board may deny the member access to the list. ( Corp. Code &sect; 8330(b)(1) ) If an authorized number of members makes the demand, and the board believes the demand is for an improper purpose, it can petition the court for an order setting aside the demand. ( Corp. Code &sect; 8331(a) ) ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login