URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/M/Membership-Rights-Responsibilities

Membership Rights & Responsibilities You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME M Membership Rights & Responsibilities Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings MEMBERSHIP RIGHTS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Condos, PDs, Co-ops &amp; TICs Other Ownership Structures Escrows and Lenders Association Defined Common Interest Developments Condominiums Planned Developments Membership Rights Stock Cooperatives Tenancies&nbsp; in Common Davis-Stirling History HOA Member Defined As provided for in Civil Code &sect; 4160 , membership in a community association is coupled with an ownership interest in a common interest development. This requirement is frequently mirrored in an association&#39;s governing documents, i.e., members must be owners of real property (lots or units) subject to the association&#39;s CC&amp;Rs. In short, a person must be on title to be a member. Member Must Be On Title . An unrecorded deed conveys property rights under certain conditions for most real property issues. However, unless an association&#39;s governing documents provide otherwise, an unrecorded deed does not confer membership status. Membership rights become active when the title is recorded for common interest developments. Explicit statements are frequently found in an association&#39;s CC&amp;Rs, bylaws, or policies and procedures. Members can hold title as sole ownership, community property, community property with right of survivorship, joint tenants with right of survivorship, and tenants in common. Spouse Not On Title (Community Property). A spouse not on title does not have the right to vote in elections or run for the board by being married to someone who is on title. Regarding real estate, rights flow to a person on title. Those with community property rights may, at a later date, have claims to equity in the property. In California, most property acquired during marriage is owned jointly by both spouses and is divided upon divorce, annulment, or death. While community property might be presumed, such rights are not guaranteed: A prenuptial agreement may have been signed; Real property may have already been separately owned, and a newly acquired spouse would have no rights to the property&nbsp;or After marriage, real property may have been acquired as the&nbsp;sole and separate property using separate funds. Although a non-owning spouse is not a member and cannot vote in membership elections, he or she can use common area recreational facilities as a resident family member of the spouse on title.&nbsp; Corporations .&nbsp; Corporations may own property and be members of a community association. A corporation is defined in the law as a &quot;legal person&quot; with all the rights of a natural person in an association. As such, a corporation, whether for-profit or charitable, may appoint a representative to attend meetings, vote, and serve on the board of directors. See Corporate Voting Rights .&nbsp; Family Trusts .&nbsp; Unlike a corporation, a trust is not a legal entity. The trustee holds legal title to property owned by a trust. A trust is simply a collection of assets and liabilities. As such, it cannot sue or be sued or to defend an action.&nbsp;( Greenspan v. LADT, LLC (2010) 191 Cal. App. 4th 486, 522.)&nbsp; Because a family trust is not a legal entity, it cannot hold title to property. It must be in the name of a trustee who holds legal title to the property on behalf of the trust with language similar to the following: &quot;John D. Smith as Trustee of the John D. Smith Family Trust dated 1/1/15.&quot;&nbsp;Accordingly, the person on title (not the beneficiaries) is deemed a member of an association. As members, trustees have the power to vote in membership elections and serve on the board. Frequently, the person living in the association is the trustee. Sometimes, however, the resident is a beneficiary of the trust or a tenant authorized by the trust to reside at the property. In that case, the resident has the right to use the facilities&nbsp;but not the right to vote or serve on the board. Under Civil Code &sect; 5105(b) , regardless of the association&#39;s bylaws, directors must be members with certain specified exceptions. See Trust Voting Rights .&nbsp; Power of Attorney . An attorney-in-fact or&nbsp; power of attorney &nbsp;is an agent authorized to act on behalf of and make legally binding decisions on behalf of another person&nbsp;but not necessarily authorized to practice law. An attorney-in-fact can manage investments, make health decisions, and do other tasks on someone else&#39;s behalf but cannot change a will or trust. A person with proper power of attorney can attend board and membership meetings and vote but cannot serve on the board of directors or use the association&#39;s amenities. If the issue arises, boards should ask for a copy of the power of attorney and have it reviewed by legal counsel. Renters . When owners lease their units to tenants, they transfer some, but not all, membership rights to their tenants. Decedents&#39; Estate . In some cases, a probate court may oversee the property of someone who has died. This includes paying&nbsp;assessments to the association. Those supervising the distribution of the estate&#39;s assets do not have any membership rights or privileges. Membership Not Severable . Membership in a CID is appurtenant to and non-severable from an owner&#39;s unit/lot. Accordingly, membership cannot be assigned, transferred, pledged, conveyed, or alienated in any way except upon the transfer of title of a unit/lot and only to the transferee of title to such unit/lot. Under those conditions, the transfer of ownership is automatic. Membership Rights The rights/powers reserved to association members are described in the&nbsp; governing documents &nbsp;and generally include the right to: Access &nbsp;their property (ingress-egress) Amend &nbsp;the CC&amp;Rs and bylaws Approve significant&nbsp; capital improvements Approve regular&nbsp; assessments over 20% Approve special&nbsp; assessments over 5% Approve&nbsp; exclusive use easements &nbsp;to members Attend open board meetings Call&nbsp; special meetings &nbsp;of the membership for a&nbsp; lawful purpose Display noncommercial signs Display the U.S. flag Dissolve an association Elect a board of directors Enforce the CC&amp;Rs Inspect &nbsp;the association&#39;s records Install&nbsp; drought-tolerant plants Install&nbsp; electric charging stations Install a&nbsp; satellite dish Install&nbsp; solar panels Modify common areas for&nbsp; disability access Own a pet Petition &nbsp;the board Receive&nbsp; notices and disclosures Receive due process for&nbsp; rules violations &nbsp;and&nbsp; reimbursement assessments Receive the&nbsp; membership list Remove directors &nbsp;from the board Reverse a rule change Right to&nbsp; improve property Serve on the board Use the&nbsp; common areas Exercise any other powers reserved to the membership via the governing documents or applicable laws. Membership Limitations Membership rights are limited to those expressly granted by statute and an association&#39;s governing documents. No Veto Power .&nbsp; Because of the division of power between the membership and the board, members do not have a direct veto over the board&#39;s decisions (except for&nbsp; rule changes ). Instead, the power to veto is indirect. If members are unhappy with board actions (or inaction), they have&nbsp; various options . Voting Rights . See Classes of Membership and Voting Rights .&nbsp; Members&#39; Responsibilities Payment of Assessments . The payment of assessments does not confer membership status. In Martin v. Bridgeport , a couple&rsquo;s daughter and son-in-law lived in the couple&rsquo;s home in an association. The daughter and son-in-law paid all expenses for the home, including payment of assessments to the association. The daughter and son-in-law sued the association to enforce the CC&amp;Rs. The Court of Appeal held that the daughter and son-in-law did not have standing to sue because they were not members, so the lawsuit was dismissed. The payment of assessments does not make tenants members, nor does it confer membership rights. The court noted that rights and duties under the CC&amp;Rs are indivisible from ownership of real property. ( Martin v. Bridgeport Community Ass&#39;n (2009) 173 Cal.App.4th 1024) Abandonment . &quot;In order for an owner to abandon a unit in a community association so as to divest himself of the duty to pay assessments, the owner must give the association record notice of the abandonment through the recording of a quitclaim deed, notice of abandonment or other recorded instrument which makes it clear that the owner is relinquishing all of the rights of ownership.&quot; ( Cerro de Alcala Homeowners Ass&#39;n v. Burns ) The same would apply to membership--acquiring membership and abandoning membership both require a recorded instrument. Comply with the Governing Documents .&nbsp; When &nbsp;they buy&nbsp;into a common interest development, members are bound by the governing documents. One of their obligations is to comply with those documents . Otherwise, the association can take disciplinary action to ensure compliance.&nbsp; Additional Information . Associations are governed by elected boards of directors with general duties and authority. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4080 .) See&nbsp; Board Authority and Duties . Renter&#39;s Rights See &quot; Renter&#39;s Rights &quot; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login