URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/O/Open-Meetings-Act

Open Meetings Act You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME O Open Meetings Act Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings OPEN HOA BOARD MEETINGS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Boards of Directors Board Meetings Committees Management Open&nbsp;Meetings Executive&nbsp;Sessions Emergency Meetings Zoom&nbsp;Meetings Emails Quorum Minutes Motions and&nbsp;Votes Meeting Notice &amp; Agenda Who Can Attend? Open Forum Recording&nbsp;Meetings Kinds of Board Meetings &nbsp; Regular Open Meetings . These are usually scheduled for the same day each month. Members can attend to observe the board conduct business.&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp; Special Open Meetings . These are scheduled as needed for matters that cannot wait for a regularly scheduled meeting. Unless otherwise provided in the bylaws, board meetings may be called by the president or any vice president, the secretary, or any two directors ( Corp. Code &sect; 7211(a)(1) ) with four days&#39; notice to the membership. &nbsp; Executive Session Meetings . Executive session meetings are closed to members due to the confidential nature of the topics discussed. Two day&#39;s notice must be given to the membership. &nbsp; Emergency Meetings . Emergency board meetings can be called to address an immediate issue and can be open or executive session.&nbsp; Open Meeting Act The legislature patterned the Open Meeting Act on the open meeting provisions of the Brown Act.&nbsp;The Brown Act is a series of statutes under Government Code &sect;&sect; 54950-54962 regulating the meetings of public legislative bodies at the local government level. Because of a homeowners association board&#39;s broad powers and the number of individuals potentially affected by a board&#39;s actions, the Legislature has mandated that boards hold open meetings and allow the members to speak publicly at the meetings. (Civ. Code, &sect;&sect; 1363.05, 1363; 1350-1376) These provisions parallel California&#39;s open meeting laws regulating government officials, agencies, and boards. (Ralph M. Brown Act, Gov. Code, &sect; 54950 et seq.) Both statutory schemes mandate open governance meetings, with notice, agenda, and minutes requirements, and strictly limit closed executive sessions. ( Damon v. Ocean Hills Journalism Club &nbsp; (2000) 85 Cal. App. 4th 468, 475) Who Can Attend ? See Who Can Attend Board Meetings? Board Meeting Defined The Davis-Stirling Act defines board meetings as a gathering of a quorum of directors at the same time and place to &quot;hear, discuss, or deliberate upon any item of business that is within the authority of the board.&quot; ( Civ. Code &sect; 4090 .)&nbsp;&nbsp;The definition of &ldquo;board meeting&rdquo; under Civil Code &sect; 4090(a) does not include email correspondence between directors, even if they discuss association business.&nbsp; In sum, we conclude &quot;board meeting,&quot; as defined by section 4090 , subdivision (a), is an in-person gathering of a quorum of the directors of a homeowners association at the same time and in the same physical location for the purpose of talking about and taking action on items of association business. E-mail exchanges among directors on those items that occur before a board meeting and in which no action is taken on the items, such as those at issue in this case, do not constitute board meetings within the meaning of that provision. ( LNSU #1 v. Alta Del Mar Coastal Collection Cmty. Ass&#39;n ) The court rejected the argument that relied on the language of Civil Code &sect; 4910(b) (prohibiting a board meeting via email except in an emergency) as indicating a board meeting could be held by email.&nbsp; We therefore read section 4910, subdivision (b) as specifying a third method, in addition to and different from those defined by section 4090 , by which the board may conduct a meeting and take action on a matter of homeowners association business, and which may be used only in an emergency as defined by section 4923. It is not a subset of the type of board meeting defined by section 4090, subdivision (a), by which the board may take action on association business matters in nonemergency situations.&nbsp;( LNSU #1 v. Alta Del Mar Coastal Collection Cmty. Ass&#39;n ) Email Between Directors . For more information, see &quot; Email Between Directors .&quot; Disallowed Board Meetings Boards cannot act on any business item outside of a board meeting.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 4910(a) ) &quot;Item of business&quot; means any action within the board&#39;s authority, except those actions the board has validly delegated to any other person or persons, managing agent, officer of the association, or committee of the board comprising less than a majority of the directors. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4155 ) Except for emergencies, boards cannot conduct business by email (see Unanimous Written Consent below). Nor can Boards conduct&nbsp;&quot;Serial meetings&quot; that seek to evade the Open Meeting Act. Serial meetings come in two forms: Chain Meetings &nbsp;(or daisy chain meetings) occur where director &quot;A&quot; talks to director &quot;B&quot; who talks to &quot;C&quot; who, in turn, talks to &quot;D&quot; to get a decision on a piece of business.&nbsp;A variation is where A and B talk, then A talks to C and B talks to D, etc.. No more than two are ever in the conversation, so a quorum is never involved, but decisions are being made and action taken on business outside of an open meeting and without minutes Hub-Spoke Meetings &nbsp;(also called wheel-hub meetings) occur when directors are spokes with one person at the center (the hub). Directors never talk to each other; they each talk separately to a director (or manager) who coordinates and relays the messages to make a decision and take action outside of a meeting and without minutes.&nbsp; The Davis-Stirling Act does not address these kinds of meetings. Whenever in doubt about open meeting compliance, the&nbsp;Brown Act&nbsp;and the&nbsp;Bagley-Keene Act can provide guidance. The Brown Act prohibits such communications, whether direct, by intermediaries, or electronically. (Gov. Code &sect; 54952.2; 63 Opps.Atty.Gen. 820 (1980);&nbsp; Stockton Newspapers v. Redevelopment Agency &nbsp;(1985) 171 Cal.App.3d 95) Exceptions to the Open Meeting Act Not all gatherings of directors in one place are considered &quot;board meetings.&quot;&nbsp;In addition to&nbsp; executive session &nbsp;matters , a majority of directors can attend committee meetings, seminars, or social events without violating the Davis-Stirling Open Meeting Act. Although not specifically covered in the Davis-Stirling Open Meeting Act, these issues have already been addressed for public agencies in the Bagley-Keene Act and the Brown Act. They provide good guidelines on what homeowner association boards are allowed to do. Bagley-Keene Act . The Bagley-Keene Open Meeting Act governs meetings of local governments and closely parallels the Brown Act. Bagley-Keene states that boards have three duties: (i) give adequate notice of their meetings, (ii) provide an opportunity for public comment, and (iii) conduct their meetings in open session, except where a closed session is expressly authorized. All three principles were incorporated into the Davis-Stirling Open Meeting Act. As provided for in Bagley-Keene, not all board gatherings violate the Act. A majority of directors can gather for the following purposes, provided they do not discuss board business among themselves: A&nbsp; conference &nbsp;or similar gathering open to the public. (Gov. Code &sect; 11122.5(c)(2)) An open and publicized meeting organized to address a topic of state concern. (&sect; 11122.5(c)(3)) A purely&nbsp; social or ceremonial &nbsp;occasion. (&sect; 11122.5(c)(5)) An open and noticed&nbsp; committee meeting , provided board members who are not members of the committee attend only as observers. (&sect; 11122.5(c)(6); see&nbsp; Guide To Bagley-Keene Open Meeting Act ) A closed&nbsp; executive committee &nbsp;meeting composed of less than a quorum of directors. (Note: This would not be true for a 3-member board since&nbsp; executive committees &nbsp;require at least two members.) Brown Act . Similarly, under the Brown Act (Gov. Code &sect; 54952.2(c)), the following actions would not be considered a violation: Individual contacts &nbsp;or conversations between a member of a legislative body and any other person. The attendance of a majority of the members of a legislative body at a&nbsp; conference &nbsp;or similar gathering open to the public that involves a discussion of issues of general interest to the public or to public agencies of the type represented by the legislative body, provided that a majority of the members do not discuss among themselves, other than as part of the scheduled program, business of a specified nature that is within the subject matter jurisdiction of the local agency. Nothing in this paragraph is intended to allow members of the public free admission to a conference or similar gathering at which the organizers have required other participants or registrants to pay fees or charges as a condition of attendance. The attendance of a majority of the members of a legislative body at an open and publicized meeting organized to address a topic of local community concern by a person or organization other than the local agency, provided that a majority of the members do not discuss among themselves, other than as part of the scheduled program, business of a specific nature that is within the subject matter jurisdiction of the legislative body of the local agency. The attendance of a majority of the members of a legislative body at an open and noticed meeting of another body of the local agency, provided that a majority of the members do not discuss among themselves, other than as part of the scheduled meeting, business of a specific nature that is within the subject matter jurisdiction of the legislative body of the local agency. The attendance of a majority of the members of a legislative body at a purely&nbsp; social or ceremonial occasion , provided that a majority of the members do not discuss among themselves business of a specific nature that is within the subject matter jurisdiction of the legislative body of the local agency. Board Orientation/Training . &nbsp;A board orientation&nbsp;or training session is an informational meeting for new boards where directors meet with the association&#39;s management and/or legal counsel to (i) learn about the board&#39;s duties, (ii) receive an update on legal issues, and (iii) receive historical background information. As such, a board orientation does not require notice to the membership and may be closed. If, however, there is an expectation that pending legal matters will also be discussed with the association&#39;s attorney, a two-day notice of an&nbsp; executive session meeting &nbsp;needs to be posted. Allowable Meeting Formats &nbsp; In Person. Directors can meet in person at a physical location. Virtual (Zoom) Meetings. Directors can meet by telephone or video conference. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4090(b) ; see Zoom Meetings ) Unanimous Written Consents .&nbsp;Before the Legislature&#39;s 2012 amendment to the Open Meeting Act, boards could take actions with unanimous written consent without a meeting. Such actions are now disallowed except for emergencies. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4910(a) ;&nbsp;see Emergency Meetings )&nbsp;In associations that are not common interest developments, boards can continue to act by unanimous written consent. ( Corp. Code&nbsp;&sect; 7516 ;&nbsp; Corp.&nbsp;Code &sect; 7211(b) ) Pledge of Allegience &amp; Prayer &nbsp; Pledge of Allegiance . It is common for many organizations to recite the Pledge of Allegiance at the start of their meetings. It is fairly routine and noncontroversial: I pledge allegiance to the flag of the United States of America, and to the republic for which it stands, one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all. Directors and owners have the right to make political statements by refusing to recite the pledge.&nbsp; Civic Prayer . &nbsp;Civic prayer has been a tradition in our Country since the Pilgrims landed on Plymouth Rock in 1620. The Pledge of Allegiance was added to civic functions in the late 1800s. Both remained noncontroversial until the 1960s, when significant change roiled through the nation, challenging institutional traditions at all levels. The courts became a battleground for church/state issues. Court Review .&nbsp; In the 1983 case&nbsp; Marsh vs. Chambers, &nbsp;the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that prayer at public meetings followed a long, historic tradition and was constitutional. Citing public prayers from George Washington&#39;s inaugural address to George Bush&#39;s cabinet meetings, the 7th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals held that &quot;prayers and the invocation of divine guidance have been accepted as part of American political discourse throughout the history of this Republic.&quot; ( DeBoer v. Village of Oak Park, Ill) Homeowner Associations . &nbsp;Thus far, the church/state battle has not affected homeowners associations because HOAs are private organizations, not governmental entities. As a result, the &quot;wall of separation&quot; argument does not apply to board meetings. Even so, many are uncomfortable with public prayer and each board must decide for itself whether to use it. It should be noted that a policy adopted by one board does not bind subsequent boards. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login