URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/P/Provisional-Directors-Receivers

Provisional Directors & Receivers You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME P Provisional Directors & Receivers Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings PROVISIONAL DIRECTORS & RECEIVERS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Boards of Directors Board Meetings Committees Management Board&nbsp;Authority &amp; Duties Fiduciary&nbsp;Duties Ethics Censure Provisional&nbsp; Directors Director&nbsp;Resignations Director Appointments Officers Provisional Director If an association has an even number of directors who are equally divided and cannot agree as to the management of the association&#39;s affairs, any director or members holding not less than 33 1/3 percent of the voting power may bring an action to have the court appoint a provisional director to break the deadlock. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7225(a) ) A provisional director has all the rights and powers of a director until the deadlock in the board or among members is broken or until such provisional director is removed by a court order or by approval of a majority of all members. The director shall be entitled to such compensation as shall be fixed by the court unless otherwise agreed with the corporation. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7225(d) ) Appointment . To seek the appointment of a provisional director, the petitioner states the facts of the dispute and why the board is evenly divided and states facts showing that the board can&rsquo;t resolve the deadlock. The facts should show that corporate activities can no longer be conducted to an advantage or that there is a danger that corporate property, activities, or business will be impaired or lost. In Re Jamison Steel Corporation, the court held that a provisional director could be appointed when it was shown that the board could not decide on matters after repeated votes. It resulted in incumbent directors holding over in the office. The court stated, &ldquo;We do not feel that perpetuation of existing policies or incumbent officers in office can be construed as effectively managing corporate affairs.&rdquo; ( In Re Jamison Steel Corp . (1958) 158 Cal.App.2d 27, 38) In another case, there was so much dissension from the directors they couldn&rsquo;t come to any agreements. The court stated this dissension was enough grounds to appoint a provisional director. The court did not need to determine the veracity of the various deadlocked issues, only that the divisiveness was sufficient to necessitate the appointment of a provisional director. ( In re Annrhon, Inc. (1993) 17 Cal.App.4th 742, 754) Receiver - Custodian A lawsuit must be filed for the appointment of a receiver. A director, homeowner, or vendor can file it. There must be a factual showing of fraud, mismanagement, breach of fiduciary duties, harm or danger. Once the showing is made, the court can appoint a third party (a receiver or custodian) to manage the association. ( Code Civ. Proc. &sect; 564(b)(1) and (9) )&nbsp;Board members are removed, and the receiver takes control of the association&#39;s money, records, insurance, contracts, utility bills, and books and records. The receiver oversees and manages the association and approves vendors, budgets, and reserve studies. He/she can retain and supervise or terminate the management company. The receiver can approve an emergency special assessment and, with court approval, approve a special assessment.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 5610 ;&nbsp; O&rsquo;Toole v. Kingsbury Court ) The receiver is paid hourly.&nbsp; When the receiver determines the association is on sound footing, he/she schedules a special meeting to elect a new board of directors. Once a new board is in place, the receiver makes a final report to the court.&nbsp; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login