URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/P/Process-Server

Process Server You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME P Process Server Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings PROCESS SERVERS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Responding to process servers is often a problem for associations with employees stationed at the entry gate of a homeowner association or at the front desk of a condominium highrise. Some associations simply throw away legal documents which have been &quot;dropped&quot; in their laps even though the documents are intended for a resident. This can create liability for the association if the resident suffers adverse consequences as a result of the association&#39;s failure to forward the documents. Authorized Process Servers As provided for in Section 415.21 of the Civil Code, associations must allow process servers onto the property if they identify the person they intend to serve, display a driver&#39;s license or other identification, and provide evidence that they are a: county sheriff, marshal, registered process server, or licensed private investigator. Substitute Service If an association is gated and has a manned guard gate, substitute served on the guard may be appropriate. In Bein v. Brechtel-Jochim , a process server made three separate attempts to serve a party at their residence. Each time, the gate guard denied access. The court held that substitute service was appropriate. This does not apply to associations with unmanned security systems. To qualify, the substitute services must be on a guard. Sample HOA Policy As provided for in&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 415.21 , process servers have the right to access the property&nbsp;for the purpose of serving legal papers on residents. To that end, the following policy has been adopted by the Board of Directors: Identification of Process Server . &nbsp;Before being allowed entry, a process server must: (i) identify the person he/she intends to serve, (ii) display a driver&#39;s license or other identification, and (iii) provide evidence showing that he/she is a Sheriff, Marshal, registered process server or licensed private investigator. Hours of Service .&nbsp; The hours during which a process server may enter the property shall be 7:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. Notification of Resident . &nbsp;Security will call the resident whenever a process server has been given entry. This is so the resident does not become frightened by an unannounced stranger knocking on their door and serving them with papers. In keeping with the statutory provision, the Association will let the process server onto the property even if the resident demands otherwise. Also, Security will notify the resident even if the process server demands the resident not be notified. Escorting Process Server .&nbsp; Providing access to a process server does not mean he/she is free to roam the property. Depending on the availability of personnel, it will be the Association&#39;s policy to escort the process server directly to the resident&#39;s door. If the resident does not answer the door, the process server will then be escorted off the property No Offer to Accept Service .&nbsp; If the process server is not successful in serving the resident, the Association&#39;s personnel will not offer to accept the papers on behalf of the resident. If the process server tries to give the papers to the employee, they will be refused. Documents Forwarded to Resident . &nbsp;If, despite the Association&#39;s refusal to accept the papers, the process server drops the papers on the ground in front of the employee, the papers will be mailed to the resident along with a&nbsp;letter&nbsp;by first class mail. A copy of the letter and the papers will then be put in the resident&#39;s file. The Association will take no position regarding the validity of the attempt to substitute service on the Association. However, the documents will be forwarded to the resident so as not to impair the resident&#39;s rights. The resident can dispute with the court the validity of the service. Sample Letter When Sub-Served Following is a sample letter when documents are drop-served on a security guard.&nbsp; Resident&#39;s name &lt;address&gt; &nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; Re:&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Process Server Dear _________: A process server attempted to serve you with legal documents today. Upon leaving the property, the person insisted on leaving the enclosed documents. The Association refused the papers, but the process server left them anyway. The Association takes no position regarding the validity of the substituted service. However, when papers are left with us, they are forwarded to the resident so as not to impair anyone&#39;s rights. You should review the enclosed documents with your attorney and take appropriate action. Very truly yours, ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with issues affecting community associations, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login