URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/P/Proper-HOA-Terminology

Proper HOA Terminology You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME P Proper HOA Terminology Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings PROPER HOA TERMINOLOGY Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Governing Documents Bylaws &amp; Articles CC&amp;Rs Gov Docs Hierarchy Proper Terminology Rules of Interpretation Liberally&nbsp; Construed Proper Terminology, Grammar, and Spelling &nbsp; Association . When used generically, association is not capitalized. When referring to a specific association, it is capitalized. Example: &quot;There are 50,000 associations in California, but the Penny Lane Association is the best.&quot; Board . Like the word&nbsp;&quot;association,&quot;&nbsp; board is not capitalized when used generically but capitalized when referring to a specific board. Example: &quot;All boards must follow the Davis-Stirling Act so our Board attends CAI luncheons to learn about the law.&quot; Bylaws . In the early years of the industry, developer lawyers used by laws or by-laws . Now, it is a single word without spaces or hyphens: bylaws . The word is not capitalized if used generically. If you refer to a specific set of association bylaws then it can be capitalized. For example, &quot;Most associations still use their original developer-drafted bylaws, but we recently restated the Sleepy Hollow Bylaws to get rid of the developer language.&quot; Canceled . The proper spelling of canceled in U.S. English is with one &quot;L&quot;. Words such as cancel and travel do not double the final L when using -er, -ed, and -ing. However, over the past 20 years,&nbsp;the British spelling, cancelled , has crept into common usage. CC&amp;Rs . Putting an apostrophe in CC&amp;R&#39;s is improper. An apostrophe followed by an &quot;s&quot; signifies a contraction, such as &quot;That&#39;s my car,&quot; or the possessive form of a word, such as &quot;Henry&#39;s car.&quot; CC&amp;Rs are neither possessive nor a contraction; it is an abbreviation for Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions. Accordingly, the proper convention is CC&amp;Rs . Dues . Some argue that it is inappropriate to use the term dues because dues are voluntary, such as membership dues to a health club, while assessments are mandatory, such as those levied by homeowners associations. However, the Oxford English Dictionary defines dues as a general term covering any type of money due, including assessments. Therefore, all assessments are dues by definition. Either term is acceptable, but industry practice is to call monthly assessments &quot;dues&quot; because they are fixed and regular. They are due every month. The term assessment is used for something extraordinary, such as a special assessment or emergency assessment. Highrise . Like bylaws, early usage of this term was in the form of two words, sometimes hyphenated: high rise or high-rise . Common usage is now highrise. Homeowners Association . There are many variations in the usage of this term. It is sometimes used in the singular homeowner association. Some break it into three words, as in home owners association. Some will make it singular possessive homeowner&#39;s while others use the plural possessive homeowners&#39; association. The most common usage seems to be the non-possessive plural homeowners association .&nbsp;Many use HOA or homeowners association as a catch-all to refer to all residential CIDs (condominiums, PDs, stock coops, and community apartment projects) as opposed to commercial associations. Others insist that HOA can only refer to single-family planned developments and prefer community association as a generic term for residential associations. However, some industry professionals reserve the term &quot;community association&quot; for large, high-end communities. There is no rule as to which term should be used as a catch-all for residential associations. The most common ones seem to be association , community association, and homeowners association , all of which,&nbsp;from a legal standpoint, are interchangeable. Judgment . This word is frequently misspelled as &quot; judgement&quot; with an extra &quot;e&quot; in the middle of the word. That spelling is&nbsp;used by the British but not in American English. The proper spelling is judgment . Manager Designations . The myriad of manager certifications and designations can turn into alphabet soup. See proper usage of designations . Planned Development. &nbsp;A planned development (PD) is a category of common-interest developments under the Davis-Stirling Act. Some governing documents use the terms &quot;planned unit development&quot; (PUD) and &quot;planned residential development&quot; (PRD). Unless an association&#39;s governing documents state otherwise, the proper term is &quot;Planned Development.&quot; President . Most in the HOA industry refer to the President as the Board President or President of the Board .&nbsp; There is no harm in using the term, although technically, most governing documents define the office as&nbsp; President of the Association . &nbsp;In almost all cases, the president chairs board meetings. In most large for-profit corporations, there is a separation of the duties and offices between the president of the corporation and the chairman of the board (or chairwoman), who chairs or runs the meetings. This separation of duties rarely exists in community associations. Shareholder . Referring to a homeowner in a condominium or planned development as a shareholder is improper. In all four forms of common interest developments (condominiums, PDs, stock cooperatives, and community apartments ), owners are members of the association that manages the development. Only in stock cooperatives , can an owner be properly referred to as a shareholder. Civil Code &sect; 4190 uses the word shareholder and speaks of the owner having a share in a stock cooperative. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . &nbsp; Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login