URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/P/Partial-Payments-Payment-Plans-Priority-of-Payments

Partial Payments, Payment Plans & Priority of Payments You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME P Partial Payments, Payment Plans & Priority of Payments Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings PAYMENTS: PARTIAL, PLANS, PRIORTY Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Annual Budgets Collections Audits &amp; Reviews Bank Accounts &amp; Loans Reserves Taxes Collection&nbsp;Policy Owner&#39;s Duty&nbsp; to Pay Late Charges &amp; Interest Partial Payments Foreclosure Process Bankruptcy Partial Payments Required to Accept Partial Payments . Previously, the industry standard was to reject partial payments once foreclosure had been initiated. It ensured full payment of the delinquency and any collection costs incurred by the association. That changed in 2014 in&nbsp; Huntington Continental v. Miner .&nbsp;The court ruled that associations must accept partial payments from owners in the lien or foreclosure stages of collection. If the payment reduces the delinquent assessments to less than $1,800 , the association cannot foreclose (judicially or non-judicially). ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect;&nbsp;5720 ) NOTE : This does not apply to (1) assessments secured by a lien that is more than 12 months delinquent ; (2) assessments owed by owners of separate interests in timeshare estates , as defined in subdivision (x) of Section 11212 of the Business and Professions Code or (3) assessments owed by the developer .&nbsp;( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect;&nbsp;5720 (c)) Liens Remain in Place . Although this decision may impact some pending and future collection actions, it is also important to note what the court did not say. The court did not say that assessment liens must be released after receipt of a partial payment or that associations are required to accept payment plans. Payment Priority . Any payments made by the owner shall be applied to assessments first, not fees and costs. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5655 ) Payment Plans Boards must&nbsp;consider payment plan requests by delinquent owners. ( Civ. Code &sect;&nbsp;5665(a) ) Payment plans must conform with the payment plan standards of the association, if they exist. ( Civ. Code &sect;&nbsp;5665 ; Civ. Code &sect; 5730(a) ) Notice of Payment Plan Standards . Associations must provide members with their standards for payment plans, if any exist. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5730(a) ; Civ. Code &sect; 5665(a) ) An association&#39;s obligation to inform owners of the association&rsquo;s standards for payment plans must also be disclosed as part of the association&rsquo;s &ldquo;annual statement of collection procedures,&rdquo; which is a component of the association&rsquo;s&nbsp;annual policy statement.&nbsp; Request to Meet With the Board . Whether or not an association has written standards for payment plans, owners may submit a written request to meet with the board to discuss a payment plan for delinquent assessments. The board &quot;shall&quot; meet with owners in executive session . The meeting must occur within 45 days of the postmark of the request if the request is mailed within 15 days of the date of the postmark of the notice, unless there is no regularly scheduled board meeting within that period, in which case the board may designate a committee of one or more members to meet with the owner. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5665(b) ) Approval is Discretionary . Boards are not required to grant payment plans; they are only required to consider them. Boards may approve payment plans for some but not others. For example, it may grant a payment plan for an owner with a temporary hardship but decline a payment plan for an owner who does not have a hardship. Liens Not Affected . &nbsp;Payment plans do not affect an association&rsquo;s ability to record a lien on the owner&rsquo;s separate interest to secure payment of delinquent assessments. ( Civ. Code &sect;&nbsp;5665(d) )&nbsp;Additional late fees may not accrue during the payment plan period if the owner complies with the payment plan terms. In the event of a default on any payment plan, the association may resume its efforts to collect the delinquent assessments from the time before entering into the payment plan. Default on Payment Plan . If an owner defaults on the payment plan, the association may resume its assessment collection efforts from the point in time before entering into the payment plan. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5665(e) ) Payment Plans Not&nbsp;Subject to Inspection .&nbsp;Payment plans are not &ldquo;association records,&rdquo; which are subject to inspection by an association&rsquo;s members. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 5215(a)(5)(B) ) Timeshares . Payment plan requirements do not apply to timeshares. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5730 ) Priority of Payments Any payments made by an owner must first be applied to the assessments owed. Only after the assessments owed are paid in full may payments be applied to the fees and costs of collection, attorney&#39;s fees, late charges, or interest. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5655(a) ) ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login