URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/P/Protection-of-Volunteers-Against-Liability

Protection of Volunteers Against Liability You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME P Protection of Volunteers Against Liability Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings PROTECTING VOLUNTEERS FROM LIABILITY Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Legal Issues Security Attorney-Client Privilege Liability Protections Internal Dispute Resolution Alternative Dispute Resolution Harassment Small Claims&nbsp; Court Attorneys&#39; Fees Artificial Intelligence Volunteer Defined California&#39;s&nbsp; Corporation Code &sect; 5239(b) &nbsp;defines &ldquo;Volunteer&rdquo; to mean the rendering of services without compensation. &ldquo;Compensation&rdquo; means remuneration, whether by way of salary, fee, or other consideration, for services rendered. However, the payment of per diem, mileage, or other reimbursement expenses to a director or executive officer does not affect that person&rsquo;s status as a volunteer within the meaning of this section. Payment of per diem, mileage, or other reimbursement expenses to a director or executive officer does not affect that person&#39;s status as a volunteer. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7231.5(b) ;&nbsp; Civ. Code &sect; 5800(b) ) For example, if a director buys light bulbs for the common areas using his own money, the association can reimburse him without impacting his volunteer status. Directors should ALWAYS produce a receipt for those items for which they are seeking reimbursement. The board members of a homeowners association are seldom professional managers, are very often uncompensated&nbsp;and most often are neighbors. Undoubtedly, the specter of personal liability would serve to greatly discourage active and meaningful participation by those most capable of shaping and directing homeowner activities. ( Jaffe v. Huxley Architecture (1988) 200 Cal.App.3d 1188, 1193)&nbsp; [T]he services of directors and officers of nonprofit corporations who serve without compensation are critical to the efficient conduct and management of the public service and charitable affairs of the people of California ...&nbsp;It is the public policy of this state to provide incentive and protection to the individuals who perform these important functions.&nbsp;( Corp. Code &sect; 5047.5(a) ) Business Judgment Rule Even though officers and directors are deemed fiduciaries , boards are not required to make the &quot;right&quot; decision. Rather, they must make what they believe to be the best decision for the corporation with the available information. The Business Judgment Rule ( Corp. Code &sect; 7231 ) protects directors from personal liability if they make decisions that result in damage or loss to others, provided their decisions were made: Good Faith . In good faith (The business judgment rule immunizes directors from good faith mistakes in judgment. Barnes v. State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co ., (1993) 16 Cal.App.4th 365, 378); To rebut good faith, plaintiff must point to specific evidence establishing a director&#39;s conscious doing of a wrong because of a dishonest purpose or moral obliquity, furtive design or ill will. Pugh v. See&#39;s Candies, Inc. (1988) 203 Cal.App.3d 743, 763-764) &nbsp; Best Interests . In a manner that the directors believe to be in the best interests of the corporation, and &nbsp; Reasonable Inquiry . With such care, including reasonable inquiry , as an ordinarily prudent person in a like position would use under similar circumstances. (Before making decisions, boards may rely on the advice of persons they believe to be reliable and competent in the matters being presented. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7231(b) ; also see &quot; Competent Advice &quot; under Due Diligence) The phrase &quot;in a like position&quot; means the court will look at industry standards for volunteer homeowner association directors rather than paid professional directors. Professional directors are held to a higher standard. (See Parth Statement of Decision in the remanded case) &quot;Permitting directors to remain ignorant and to rely on their uninformed beliefs to obtain summary judgment would gut the reasonable diligence element of the rule and, quite possibly, incentivize directors to remain ignorant.&quot; ( Palm Springs Villas II HOA v. Parth (2016)&nbsp;248 Cal.App.4th 268) The BJR creates a presumption that directors&#39; decisions are based on sound business judgment. This presumption can be rebutted only by a factual showing of fraud, bad faith, or gross overreaching. ( Ritter &amp; Ritter v. The Churchill (2008) 166 Cal.App.4th 103, 123) Corporate directors are presumed to have acted in good faith, on an informed basis, and in the honest belief that the action taken was in the best interest of the corporation. ( Katz v. Chevron Corp. (1994) 22 Cal.App.4th 1352, 1366) For the business judgment rule to apply, boards must actually make a decision. Inaction is not protected. ( In re Walt Disney Co. Derivative Litig (Del Ch 2005) 907 A.2d 693) Weighing the facts and making a conscious decision to take no action is protected. A decision to refrain from action is different from inaction. An association is not shielded from liability if directors ignore problems. ( Affan v. Portofino Cove ) &nbsp; Boards can weigh the gravity of a rules violation and the likely outcome of litigation and make a good faith determination not to litigate a particular violation, and their decision is protected. ( Beehan v. Lido Isle ) &nbsp; A director acting with a material conflict of interest is not protected from personal liability by the business judgment rule. ( Coley v. Eskaton ) &nbsp; [T]he business judgment rule protects well-meaning directors who are misinformed, misguided, and honestly mistaken. [Directors are] protected by the business judgment rule unless they knew their acts were illegal or they &ldquo;knowingly committed acts outside the scope of their authority.&rdquo; ( Biren v. Equality Emergency Medical Group, Inc . (2002) 102 Cal.App.4th 125, 137) Davis-Stirling Insurance Protections Protecting Directors from Personal Liability . As provided for in Civil Code &sect; 5800(a) , a volunteer officer or director who owns no more than two separate residential interests ( Civ. Code &sect; 5800(e) ) is not personally liable in excess of the association&#39;s insurance for bodily injury, emotional distress, wrongful death, or property damage or loss as a result of the tortious act or omission of the officer or director if all of the following criteria are met: The act or omission was performed within the scope of the officer&#39;s or director&#39;s association duties. The act or omission was performed in good faith. The act or omission was not willful, wanton, or grossly negligent . The association maintained and had in effect at the time the act or omission occurred and at the time a claim is made one or more policies of Directors &amp; Officers Insurance &nbsp;in the following minimum amount: At least $500,000 if the association consists of 100 or fewer separate interests; At least $1,000,000 if the association consists of more than 100 separate interests. Protecting Owners from Personal Liability .&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 5805 &nbsp;protects owners from individual liability provided their association maintains at least minimum levels of insurance as follows:&nbsp; $2 million &nbsp;for associations with 100 or fewer separate interests, and&nbsp; $3 million &nbsp;for associations with more than 100 separate interests. The protection applies to both incorporated and unincorporated associations. For more information, see Commercial General Liability Insurance .&nbsp; Governing Document Protections Most, but not all, association CC&amp;Rs and bylaws contain hold harmless and indemnity &nbsp;provisions protecting directors and officers from liability for&nbsp; negligent &nbsp;acts and omissions while in office. If the language is missing, it can be added when governing documents are amended .&nbsp;An association has the right to defend itself and its directors. Indemnity Protections The Corporations Code provides that &ldquo;A corporation shall have power to indemnify any person who was or is a party or is threatened to be made a party to any proceeding.&rdquo; ( Corp. Code &sect; 7237(b) ) &ldquo;Proceeding&rdquo; means any threatened, pending, or completed action or proceeding, whether civil, criminal, administrative, or investigative. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7237(a) ) In addition to the right to defend itself, an association owes a duty of indemnification to its directors to the extent a complaint arises out of actions undertaken on behalf of the association ( Fidelity Mortgage Trustee Serv., Inc. v. Ridgegate E. Homeowners Ass&rsquo;n (1994) 27 Cal.App.4th 503, 525) 501(c)4 Corporations Some homeowner associations qualify as a 501(c)(4) social welfare organization because they &nbsp; benefit the entire community, not just their members. &nbsp; As such, their board members have additonal liability protection under section 425.15 of the Code of Civil Procedure . This particular statute establishes a procedure for filing a claim against their directors.&nbsp;Before a cause of action against a board member can proceed, a plaintiff must first submit a verified petition with supporting affidavits showing a court facts that substantiate claims against a director. The director responds with his/her own evidence. If a court determines that the evidence supports a claim against the director, the case can proceed. If the judge is not convinced, the case cannot proceed. This prevents frivolous lawsuits against directors. Case Law Liability Protections An officer or director will not be liable for torts in which he does not&nbsp;personally participate, of which he has no knowledge, or to which he has&nbsp;not consented. While the corporation itself may be liable for such&nbsp;acts, the individual officer or director will be immune unless he authorizes,&nbsp;directs, or in some meaningful sense actively participates in the wrongful&nbsp;conduct. To maintain tort claim against a director in his or her personal capacity, a&nbsp;plaintiff must first show that the director specifically authorized, directed or&nbsp;participated in allegedly tortious conduct, or that although they specifically&nbsp;knew or reasonably should have known that some hazardous condition or&nbsp;activity under their control could injure plaintiff, they negligently failed to&nbsp;take or order appropriate action to avoid the harm. The plaintiff must also&nbsp;allege and prove that an ordinarily prudent person, knowing what the&nbsp;director knew at that time, would not have acted similarly under the&nbsp;circumstances. ( Frances T. v. Village Green Owners Ass&rsquo;n &nbsp;(1986) 42 Cal. 3d 490, 503-04, 508-09) A mistake of judgment on the part of a board of directors does not justify taking control of corporate affairs from the board of directors and placing it with the stockholders. The board of directors may make incorrect decisions, as well as correct ones, so long as it is faithful to the corporation and uses its best business judgment. ( Behan v. Lido Isle Community Ass&#39;n (1977) 70 Cal.App.3d 858, 866) Generally, courts will uphold decisions made by the governing board of an owners&#39; association so long as they represent good faith efforts to further the purposes of the common interest development, are consistent with the development&#39;s governing documents, and comply with public policy. Thus, subordination of individual property rights to the collective judgment of the owners&#39; association, together with restrictions on the use of real property, comprise the chief attributes of owning property in a common interest development. Inherent in the condominium concept is the principle that to promote the health, happiness, and peace of mind of the majority of the unit owners since they are living in such close proximity and using facilities in common, each unit owner must give up a certain degree of freedom of choice which he [or she] might otherwise enjoy in separate, privately owned property. ( Nahrstedt v. Lakeside Village (1994) 8 Cal.4th 361, 374) Elements of the Business Judgment Rule . California also has a statutory business judgment rule.&nbsp; Corporation Code &sect; 7231(a) &nbsp;provides that a director must perform the duties of a director in&nbsp; good faith , in a manner such director believes to be in the best interests of the corporation and with such care as an ordinarily prudent person in a like position would use under similar circumstances. &nbsp;Subdivision (b) provides that the director is entitled to rely on information, opinions, and reports presented by certain specified persons. Finally, subdivision (c) provides that a person who performs the duties of a director in accordance with subdivisions (a) and (b) shall have no liability based upon any alleged failure to discharge the person&#39;s obligations as a director . The rule provides further that no cause of action for damages shall arise against, any volunteer director based upon any alleged failure to discharge the person&#39;s duties as a director of a nonprofit organization if that person: (1) performs the duties of office in good fait h ; (2) performs the duties of office in a manner believed to be in the best interests of the corporation; and (3) performs the duties of office with such care, including reasonable inquiry , as an ordinary prudent person in a like position would use under similar circumstances. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7231.5(a) ) Presumption . The business judgment rule sets up a presumption that directors&#39; decisions are based on sound business judgment. This presumption can be rebutted only by a factual showing of fraud, bad faith, or gross overreaching. The business judgment rule&nbsp;does not create a presumption that applies when a court is evaluating the independence of the committee or whether the committee acted in good faith in the first instance. ( Ritter &amp; Ritter v. The Churchill Condo. Ass&#39;n &nbsp;(2008) 166 Cal.App.4th 103, 122-123) [I]n Lamden, ample evidence demonstrated the association board engaged in the sort of reasoned decisionmaking that merits judicial deference ... [p]roof . . . that the investigation has been so restricted in scope, so shallow in execution, or otherwise so pro forma or halfhearted as to constitute a pretext or sham, consistent with the principles underlying the application of the business judgment doctrine, would raise questions of good faith or conceivably fraud which would never be shielded by that doctrine.&#39;&rdquo;]) ( Palm Springs Villas II v. Parth (2016)&nbsp;248 Cal.App.4th 268) [N]either a court nor minority shareholders can substitute their business judgment for that of a corporation where its board of directors has acted in good faith and with a view to the best interests of the corporation and all its shareholders. The power to manage the affairs of a corporation is vested in the board of directors. Where a board of directors, in refusing to commence an action to redress an alleged wrong against a corporation, acts in good faith within the scope of its discretionary power &nbsp;and reasonably believes its refusal to commence the action is good business judgment in the best interest of the corporation, a stockholder is not authorized to interfere with such discretion by commencing the action. Every presumption is in favor of the good faith of the directors. Interference with such discretion is not warranted in doubtful cases. (internal cites and quotation marks deleted; Behan v. Lido Isle Community Ass&#39;n (1977) 70 Cal.App.3d 858, 865) [T]he business judgment rule may protect a director who acts in a mistaken but good faith belief on behalf of the corporation without obtaining required shareholder approval.&quot; ... &quot;[T]he [business judgment] rule . . . protect[s] well-meaning directors who are misinformed, misguided, and honestly mistaken.&quot; ( Biren v. Equality Emergency Medical Group, Inc. (2002) 102 Cal.App.4th 125, 131-132, 137) Judicial Deference There is a related rule called the &quot;Business Judgment Doctrine&quot; or &quot; Judicial Deference ,&quot; under which courts defer to a board&#39;s business decisions&nbsp;even if a reasonable person &nbsp;could have acted differently. Absent an abuse of discretion by directors , courts will respect a board&#39;s decision. Volunteer Protection Act of 1997 The Center for Community Economic Development analyzed the Federal Volunteer Protection Act of 1997 and compared its protections against those provided by California laws. The article found that &quot;In some cases, the federal law slightly expands the protections available in California to volunteer directors and officers of nonprofit corporations, tax-exempt under Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c)(3). In other cases, California law provides broader protection. However, the insurance requirements of California law serve to defeat much of the protections available under both federal and California law.&quot; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login