URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/P/Plumbing-Fixtures

Plumbing Fixtures You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME P Plumbing Fixtures Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings PLUMBING FIXTURES INSIDE CONDO UNITS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Maintenance Pest Control Plumbing Balcony Inspections Asbestos &amp; Mold Reserves Water Damage Liability Water Lines Plumbing&nbsp;Fixtures Drain &amp; Sewer&nbsp; Lines Washer-Dryer Retrofit Right&nbsp;of Entry Faucet Leaks Inside Units Faucets&nbsp;and other plumbing fixtures located inside a condominium are the property of the unit owner and must be maintained by that owner. An average household&#39;s leaks can account for more than 10,000 gallons of water wasted every year. Common leaks are from worn toilet flappers and leaky faucets. A faucet that drips at the rate of one drip per second can waste more than 3,000 gallons per year. Because condominiums are on a master water meter, boards can hire a plumber at HOA expense to inspect all units in the complex for water leaks. If done properly, a plumber can make a complete list of leaky faucets, valves, supply lines, drains, toilets, shower heads, etc. throughout the development. The list should also include units that need water-saving devices. Arrangements can then be made to make repairs, change toilets and install water-saving devices at a discounted rate to owners if they agree to the repairs. For those who refuse, boards can hold hearings, impose fines, and send lawyer letters to persuade them to cooperate. Recommendation : Boards should meet with plumbers, legal counsel and management to set up an inspection/repair program for all plumbing in the development along with retrofitting with low-water devices. Toilet Maintenance &amp; Repairs Allocating responsibility for repairs continues to be a problem for many associations because most CC&amp;Rs offer little help in resolving the problem. Some help can be found in Civil Code &sect; 4775(a) , which states that&nbsp;unless otherwise provided in the declaration &nbsp;(CC&amp;Rs): ...the association is responsible for repairing, replacing, and maintaining the common area . ...the owner ...is responsible for repairing, replacing, and maintaining that separate interest .&nbsp;&nbsp; Unless otherwise provided in the declaration&nbsp;...the owner &nbsp;...is responsible for maintaining the exclusive use common area appurtenant to that separate interest and the association is responsible for repairing and replacing the exclusive use common area. &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; Unit Improvements . Plumbing fixtures, such as a toilet, are improvements to a condominium. In other words, toilets are contained within the air space of the unit, are part of the unit, and are owned by the owner of the condominium. Accordingly, the owner, not the association, is responsible for maintaining their toilets. If the float in the toilet tank gets stuck, causing the toilet to overflow and damage the common areas, the association is responsible for repairing the common areas, but the owner (or the owner&#39;s insurance company) is ultimately responsible for paying for the repairs. Common Area . The main drain line (in green) is considered common area because it services multiple units. This is the association&#39;s responsibility to maintain. The wall and floor (in blue) are also common areas the association is responsible for maintaining. However, the finished surfaces on the walls and floors, such as paint, wallpaper, carpet, linoleum, and tile, are the owner&#39;s responsibility to maintain. If the common areas are damaged, who pays for the damage after the association repairs the common areas ultimately depends on who caused the damage. Exclusive Use Common Area . The wax ring under the toilet and the drain line (in red) are &quot;exclusive use common area&quot; because they exclusively service the owner&#39;s toilet. As such, the owner is responsible (depending on your CC&amp;Rs) for maintaining the wax ring and exclusive use drain line even though they are located in the common area. Unfortunately, many CC&amp;Rs are silent when it comes to exclusive use common areas. Recommendation: To avoid conflict and costly litigation, associations should amend their CC&amp;Rs to clearly define maintenance responsibilities for their exclusive use common areas. At a bare minimum, boards should adopt maintenance policies in their Rules and Regulations. Shower Pan Maintenance The standard definition of a condominium unit is airspace bounded by the unfinished surfaces of perimeter walls, ceilings and floors. Anything inside that airspace is an improvement to and becomes part of the unit. This includes paint and wallpaper on walls; carpet, tile and hardwood on floors; kitchen cabinets and countertops; lighting fixtures; and plumbing fixtures such as toilets, tubs and sinks. A shower pan is installed on top of the unfinished floor of a unit. (See How to install a shower pan ) That means shower pans are inside the boundaries of a unit. As such, they are not common area nor exclusive use common area. Instead, shower pans are part of the unit and the responsibility of unit owners to maintain, repair and replace. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4775(a)(2) ) Recommendation : To minimize disputes and potential litigation, condominium associations should have legal counsel prepare a maintenance chart describing the respective maintenance obligations of the association and members. It helps everyone understand their duties. In addition, many associations need to amend their CC&amp;Rs. When we restate CC&amp;Rs we include extensive language related to maintenance obligations. Angle Stop Valves &quot;Angle stops&quot; are shut-off valves connecting the building&#39;s water supply to a unit&#39;s kitchen and bathroom sink faucets, and toilets. Owners are responsible for repairing and replacing their own angle stop valves. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login