URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/P/Swimming-Pool-Discrimination

Swimming Pool Discrimination You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME P Swimming Pool Discrimination Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings SWIMMING POOL DISCRIMINATION IN HOAs Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Disabled Discrimination Civil Rights Department Religious&nbsp;Discrimination Swimming&nbsp;Pools Bicycles &amp;&nbsp;Skateboards Discriminatory&nbsp;Rules Senior 55+ Communities Spas, Hot Tubs, and Jacuzzis Associations may adopt rules prohibiting young children from using the association&#39;s hot tub/spa. Even though discriminatory, there is a valid health reason for the restriction. Per California regulations, a&nbsp;spa&#39;s water temperature may not exceed 104 degrees. A spa&#39;s high temperatures are known to have adverse health effects on infants and toddlers. Danger of Overheating .&nbsp;Infants and young children are more susceptible to overheating than adults and should not be exposed to a spa&#39;s high temperatures. Spa manufacturers frequently provide age limit restrictions and temperature ranges in their literature. If boards adopt restrictions per the manufacturer&#39;s guidelines, they can defend against complaints of discrimination. Children Under Five .&nbsp;Generally, children 5 years old and under should not be allowed to use a whirlpool/hot tub/spa, even with adult supervision. Children between the ages of 6 and 12 should always have an adult when using the facilities. Older children using hot tubs should not soak for more&nbsp;than 5 to 10 minutes at a time. Prolonged exposure to hot temperatures can lead to dehydration, dizziness, and nausea. Recommendation : Associations should regularly inspect and maintain their spas using a licensed and insured vendor. They should also verify temperature requirements since statutes change from time to time. Finally, they have their spas inspected for proper&nbsp;safety equipment. Discrimination Against Children Except for senior community pools, associations cannot prohibit children from using swimming pools, establish adults-only pools, or establish adults-only times. In Llanos v. Coehlo , a federal court found that the association&#39;s rules designating &quot;family pools&quot; and &quot;adult areas&quot; in the complex and prohibiting children from playing in and around adult areas of the complex were discriminatory and violated the Fair Housing Act. (Also see U.S. v. Plaza Mobile Estates ) A similar decision was reached by a federal court in the unpublished case of Landesman v. Keys Condominiums . The association&#39;s reason for restricting children from the main pool was that adults enjoyed using the pool for lap swimming and they preferred the relative tranquility of a swimming pool not filled with active, noisy children. Although sympathetic, the court ruled against the association. The court is not unsympathetic to the concerns of the adult residents who want to be able to enjoy the pool in peace, but finds that plaintiffs have nonetheless established a prima facie case of discrimination and that The Keys Association has not articulated a legitimate justification for excluding children from the main pool. . . . If this were a case of a homeowners association allowing everyone to use the main pool at all available hours in the summer, with the exception of women, or persons born in Iraq or China, or members of the Episcopal Church, such restrictions would be equally unlawful as the restrictions on access by children. . . . Any problems The Keys Association believes are caused by noise or activity of certain children should be taken up with the parents or guardians of those children. Rules considered discriminatory : Age Restrictions . Forbidding children under 18 from using the swimming pool without an adult. The restriction is too broad and would create a situation where a 17-year old certified life guard could not swim alone. California Building Code&nbsp;states: Where no lifeguard service is provided, a sign shall be posted stating, &quot;NO LIFEGUARD ON DUTY.&quot; The sign must state in letters at least 1 inch (25 mm) high, &ldquo;Children should not use pool without adult supervision.&rdquo; (CBC &sect; 3120B.4 was&nbsp;amended 1-1-23 to eliminate &quot;Children under the age of 14&quot; and&nbsp;changed the&nbsp;wording from &quot;shall&quot; to &quot;should&quot;) (See Swimming Pool Signage ) &nbsp; Parental Supervision . Requiring &quot;parental&quot; supervision. Supervision cannot be restricted to a parent; any responsible adult can supervise children. The following pool restriction found in many association rules would be struct down as discriminatory:&nbsp;Children under the age of 18 are not allowed in the pool or pool area at any time unless accompanied by their parents or legal guardian.&nbsp; &nbsp; Toilet Trained . Prohibiting all non-toilet trained children from using the swimming pool. (A rule that prohibits all incontinent persons from using the pool would accomplish the same result without being discriminatory.) &nbsp; Baby Strollers . Prohibiting baby strollers, walkers and playpens from the pool area discriminates against families on its face. (A rule that allows only lounge chairs in the pool area might be acceptable.) &nbsp; Gender Discrimination . Associations cannot segregate pool swim times based on gender since it amounts to sex discrimination in violation of the Federal Fair Housing Act. ( Curto v. Country Place .) &nbsp; Other . See DFEH letter regarding discrimination against children. Case Law . Some additional cases that address discrimination against children include the following: DFEH v. Hacienda de Camarillo Apartments , (1988). FEHC ordered the apartment complex (with three sections--families, adults and seniors) to cease and desist its age discrimination restrictions (children could not visit the &quot;senior&quot; pool) and to post notices against age discrimination. &nbsp; DFEH v. Hans Sheik (1993). FEHC ordered landlord to cease and desist discrimination in not renting a house to a family with three minor children. &nbsp; HUD v. Paradise Gardens HOA (1992 WL 406531). The association prohibited child under the age of 5 from using the pool and restricted children ages 5 to 16 to using the pool from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. The purpose of the rules was to promote sanitary and healthy swimming facilities. The rules discriminate against families with children and violate the Fair Housing Act since there are no discernible differences in the amount of fecal material in adult-only swim facilities and all-age swim facilities. The association was fined $7,000. &nbsp; Iniestra v. Warren (2012).&nbsp; Safety is not a valid reason for requiring supervision of minors using pools since children may be better swimmers than adults. Decorum is also not a valid reason. Requiring adult supervision is unlikely to make children less noisy. The desire for peace and quiet may be a worthy goal for a community association, but it &ldquo;is not a justification for denying access to common facilities on the basis of familial status.&rdquo; &nbsp; Leonard v. Seaboard Arbor Management Services, Inc. (HUD ALJ 04-91-0931). The judge required the association to change its rule prohibiting all babies and children not fully potty trained from entering or being carried into the pool, to the following: &quot;Any person who is incontinent or not fully potty trained must wear appropriate waterproof clothing when entering or being carried into the pool.&quot; &nbsp; Marina Point, Ltd. v. Wolfson (1982) 30 Cal.3d 721. The California Supreme Court held that a landlord&#39;s exclusion of all families with minor children as tenants from an apartment complex was impermissible under the Unruh Act. &nbsp; O&#39;Connor v. Village Green (1983) 33 Cal.3d 790. The California Supreme Court held that a provision in CC&amp;Rs limiting residency to persons over the age of 18 was invalid. Swim Diapers The Center for Disease Control (&quot;CDC&quot;) has adopted a &quot;Vessel Sanitation Program&quot; that strictly prohibits children in diapers or who are not toilet trained from using public swimming pools and whirlpool spas on cruise ships. This is to prevent pool contamination and the spread of gastrointestinal illnesses.&nbsp;The CDC has determined that swim diapers are not effective in preventing contamination. Although swim diapers prevent solid feces from escaping (assuming they are properly fitted and changed often), they cannot prevent leakage of urine or diarrhea, which contain infection-causing germs. Some refer to swim diapers as &quot;fecal tea bags.&quot; See&nbsp; news release &nbsp;by the National Swimming Pool Foundation.&nbsp;For more information about diarrhea and swimming see the information posted on the&nbsp; Centers for Disease Control &nbsp;website. Recommendation. Based on CDC&#39;s rulings, it is our opinion that associations may adopt similar restrictions for their pools and spas. However, boards should be aware that various anti-discrimination laws prohibit discrimination based on age. Accordingly, boards should consult legal counsel to ensure their rules are properly drafted to apply neutrally to all persons who cannot control their bladder or bowels, not just children. Senior Community Swimming Pools See &quot; Senior Communities .&quot; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . &nbsp; Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login