URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/R/Roofing-Issues

Roofing Issues You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME R Roofing Issues Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings HOA ROOFING ISSUES Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links HOA Insurance Contractors, Owners &amp; Renters Fire Safety Fire Safety Disclosures Fireworks Barbecues Fireplaces Roofs Aluminum Wiring Fire Retardant Roof Materials As provided for in Civil Code &sect; 4720 , associations cannot put aesthetics over fire safety when it comes to roofs. Associations are prohibited from requiring owners to install or repair their roofs in a manner that violates Health &amp; Safety Code &sect; 13132.7 . Developments in very high fire severity zones must allow for at least one type of fire retardant roofing material that meets the requirements of the Health and Safety Code . Simply repairing a roof does not trigger the requirement for fire-retardant materials. However, replacing more than 50% of a roof within a one-year period requires the use of Class A or B materials for very high fire hazard zones and Class C for all other areas. Recommendation : All associations should have their roofing requirements reviewed by an architect or roofing consultant to establish proper standards for their particular development. NOTE: Changes required by this statute are exempt from the 30-day member notice and comment period found in Civil Code &sect; 4360 . Flat Roofs Flat roofs are not actually flat; they have a low slope to them. They come in three basic designs: 1.&nbsp;Built-Up: Asphalt-based&nbsp;multiple layers bonded together with asphaltic adhesion. Can be installed using hot asphalt, cold adhesive or heat welded (torch). Surfaces available are: loose gravel, mineral cap or a coating. Systems vary from 2 to 4 plies, which affects the availability of a product warranty. 2. Single-Ply: Made of various chemical compounds, including PVC, TPO, EPDM, and others. These are a single layer of roof covering (as opposed to Built-Up). Within the generic types, many chemical variations are available, changing the performance of the single-ply roof covering. Some are more fire-resistant than others; a significant difference is between those that sustain flame and those that do not. Many single-ply products are recommended for &ldquo;ponded water conditions&rdquo;. A great deal of caution should be given before acceptance, as ponded water has a weight factor and can create habitat for insects and plants on the roof. 3.&nbsp;Liquid Applied: The most common types are: Acrylic, Asphalt Emulsion and Spray Polyurethane Foam. They differ somewhat in application and in performance. Asphalt emulsion and Acrylic overlays require little maintenance but SPF needs more frequent inspections and must be re-coated before the foam is exposed to the weather. Maintenance . Because of their low slope, flat roofs generally require more maintenance than steeply sloped roofs. Water runs off very quickly from high-pitched roofs and has little opportunity to penetrate the roof or damage the roofing materials. Flat roofs, on the other hand, must be &ldquo;bathtub&rdquo; watertight to resist water penetration while the roof is draining from a heavy rainfall. In addition, after a rainfall, there will be pockets of standing water on the roof. Over time, standing water will break down roofing materials. As a result, flat roofs often have shorter lives and require more maintenance than pitched roofs. Capital Improvements . Replacing a hot tar-built-up roof with a modified bitumen&nbsp;roofing system does not qualify as a capital improvement. It is a roof replacement with a less costly, more efficient material. Adding crickets to a flat roof to stop ponding is not a capital improvement --it&#39;s a roof repair.&nbsp;&nbsp; Recommendation : Flat roofs should be inspected annually for any signs of damage and touched up as needed to keep them watertight.&nbsp; Skylights QUESTION: Is the skylight in a condominium considered part of the roof? Is it an association repair or a homeowner repair? ANSWER : It depends on who installed it and what your governing documents require. Original Construction . If the skylight is part of the development&#39;s original construction, it is part of the common area roof and is the association&#39;s responsibility to repair and maintain, unless your CC&amp;Rs state otherwise. Sometimes CC&amp;Rs specifically assign skylight maintenance to the unit owner. Owner Addition . If the skylight was installed without association approval, the owner could be forced to remove it. If an owner installed the skylight with association approval, typically, the owner agrees to repair and maintain the skylight. Where this becomes a problem is with subsequent owners when it starts leaking. The subsequent owner will argue that he did not install the skylight and will point to the CC&amp;Rs that the association is responsible for maintaining the roofs. Covenant to Maintain . &nbsp;To avoid disputes related to owner-installed skylights, we record a covenant signed by the owner at the time the skylight is installed. The covenant makes the owner and all subsequent owners responsible for repairing and maintaining the skylight. If the owner refuses to sign the covenant, installation of the skylight is not approved. Common Bidding Mistakes See &quot; Bidding Policy .&quot; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login