URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/R/Regulating-Fireplaces

Regulating Fireplaces You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME R Regulating Fireplaces Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings WOOD-BURNING FIREPLACES Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links HOA Insurance Contractors, Owners &amp; Renters Fire Safety Fire Safety Disclosures Fireworks Barbecues Fireplaces Roofs Aluminum Wiring QUESTION : Can a board add, change, or make up rules not in the CC&amp;Rs? Our board decided that all condos with wood/gas-burning fireplaces can ONLY use gas. I bought a condo with a wood fireplace, and it was important to me. I do not like that they arbitrarily made this decision without homeowners&#39; input. In addition, the first offense will cost $1,000, and the second offense will cost $2,000. Can they do this? ANSWER : If you review your governing documents, you will find language authorizing your association to adopt rules. In addition, you will likely find broad language authorizing it to address health and safety issues. As with everything one might enjoy, fireplaces and stoves are now heavily regulated throughout California. The reasons involve health and safety. Fireplace Fire Safety Wood-burning fireplaces can produce large amounts of soot and creosote, which coat the interior of a chimney. The buildup can create dangerous chimney fires. In addition, the chimney vents hot gases, soot, and embers from the fireplace. Over time, the inside of the chimney is coated with soot, which can lead to chimney fires.&nbsp;According to the National Fire Protection Association, there are 26,000 residential chimney fires each year. In addition, bird nests or other obstructions in chimneys can lead to carbon monoxide poisoning when gases are forced into units. Associations should inspect and clean all common area chimneys regularly. Depending on the type of materials burned in fireplaces and their frequency of usage, chimneys could need cleaning every year. Fireplace Pollution In addition to fire safety, there is the pollution problem. In most areas of the country, wood-burning stoves and fireplaces are the largest source of pollution generated by residences. In some areas, they create 80% of airborne particulates during the winter. According to the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), &quot;The fine particles in smoke...can get deep into the lungs, harming the lungs, blood vessels and heart. People with heart, vascular or lung disease, older adults, and children are the most at risk.&quot; To address this problem, the EPA issued new regulations in 2015 restricting wood-burning devices. Most counties in California now regulate or ban wood-burning fireplaces and stoves in all new construction. For example, beginning November 1, 2016, wood-burning devices are banned in all new construction in seven San Francisco Bay Area counties. Nine counties in the San Joaquin Valley not only limit them in new construction but also require all existing wood stoves to be replaced with an EPA-certified wood stove when a home is sold. Maintenance Responsibility Determining responsibility for the maintenance of fireplaces in condominium associations can be challenging. Older CC&amp;Rs are generally silent about fireplace maintenance, repairs, and replacement. There is a difference of opinion in the legal community. Some believe the fireplace falls outside the unit&#39;s boundaries and is entirely the association&#39;s responsibility. That includes the chimney, flue, and firebox. There is a contrary opinion that makes the fireplace box part of the unit and the responsibility of the unit owner, especially since only the owner receives a benefit from the fireplace, and if something were to go wrong with the fireplace, it would likely be due to the owner&#39;s actions. In addition, if the CC&amp;Rs make the owner responsible for mechanical equipment servicing their unit, this includes the fireplace. Many municipal codes define mechanical systems as anything that provides heating to a unit. For example, Section 103 of the LA County Mechanical Code entitled &ldquo;Scope&rdquo; states, &ldquo;The provisions of this Code shall apply to the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use, or maintenance of any heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances.&rdquo; Boards Can Adopt Reasonable Rules Is it reasonable for a board to require owners to switch to gas? As provided in Civil Code &sect; 4350 , to be enforceable, rules must: 1. Be in writing. 2. Be within the board&#39;s authority conferred by law or CC&amp;Rs, articles, or bylaws. 3. Not in conflict with the law or governing documents. 4. Have been adopted, amended, or repealed in good faith. 5. Be reasonable. A judge would likely find the gas-only rule meets the above criteria since state and federal regulations already restrict wood-burning stoves and fireplaces. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login