URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/R/Religious-Symbols-Sukkahs-Holiday-Decorations

Religious Symbols, Sukkahs & Holiday Decorations You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME R Religious Symbols, Sukkahs & Holiday Decorations Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings RELIGIOUS DISCRIMINATION IN HOAs Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Disabled Discrimination Civil Rights Department Religious&nbsp;Discrimination Swimming&nbsp;Pools Bicycles &amp;&nbsp;Skateboards Discriminatory&nbsp;Rules Senior 55+ Communities Clubhouse Bible Studies &nbsp; There is nothing illegal or improper in allowing a Bible study in the clubhouse. It would be intolerant to exclude homeowners from using the facilities based on their religion. As long as space is available and they follow the rules, there should be no discrimination toward any religious group that wants to gather peacefully.&nbsp;In 2018, a 55+ homeowners association settled a lawsuit over this issue. The association had allowed members to reserve rooms at its 8,000 square-foot clubhouse for activities such as book clubs, card games, Bible studies, arts &amp; crafts, etc. They had over 30 clubs and interest groups using their common area facilities.&nbsp;An atheist objected to Bible studies in the clubhouse and threatened to sue the association. In response, the board banned all religious or faith-based groups from using the common areas. Affected members contacted the Pacific Justice Institute,&nbsp;a nonprofit legal organization that defends religious freedoms and civil liberties. They sued the association for violating the Unruh Civil Rights Act and the&nbsp; Fair Employment and Housing Act &nbsp;for denying access to the common areas based on religion. In addition to injunctive relief, members sought&nbsp; punitive damages &nbsp;against the association and its directors. The association sought to dismiss the complaint or at least dismiss punitive damages. The judge refused, and a trial was scheduled. The parties went into mediation, and the&nbsp;association agreed to a number of concessions, including giving faith-based groups equal access to common area facilities. Displaying Religious Symbols Beginning January 1, 2020, community&nbsp;associations cannot prohibit the display of religious items on entry doors and door frames.&nbsp;( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 4706 ) A &ldquo;religious item&rdquo; is defined to mean&nbsp;an item displayed because of sincerely held religious beliefs. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 1940.45 )&nbsp; Religious symbols that qualify are the Jewish Mezuzah and the Christian cross. It is unlikely that Christmas wreaths and lights would qualify.&nbsp;Associations can, impose restrictions if the display:&nbsp; Threatens the public health or safety. Hinders the opening or closing of any entry door. Violates any federal, state, or local law. Contains graphics, language or any display that is obscene or otherwise illegal. Individually or in combination with any other religious item displayed or affixed on any entry door or door frame that has a total size greater than 36 by 12 square inches, provided it does not exceed the size of the door. Maintenance .&nbsp;If an association is performing maintenance, repair, or replacement of an entry door or door frame that serves a member&rsquo;s separate interest, the member may be required to remove a religious item during the time the work is being performed. After completion of the association&rsquo;s work, the member may again display or affix the religious item. The association shall provide individual notice to the member regarding the temporary removal of the religious item.&nbsp;( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 4706(b) ) Mezuzah The most common religious symbol on door frames is the Jewish mezuzah&nbsp;(Hebrew for doorpost). It is a small rectangular case (made out of metal, stone, wood, glass, or ceramics), which Jews attach to the doorpost of their homes. It is placed on the right side, upper third of the doorpost. This is usually done within 30 days of moving into a new home and&nbsp; signifies the sanctity and blessing of the Jewish home. The mezuzah contains a piece of parchment rolled into a scroll, which has a prayer in Hebrew, such as: Deuteronomy, 6:4-9 : Hear, O Israel, the Lord is our God, the Lord is one. You shall love the Lord, your God, with all your heart, with all your soul, and with all your resources. And these things that I command you today shall be upon your heart. And you shall teach them to your children, and you shall speak of them when you sit in your house and when you go on the way, when you lie down and when you rise up. And you shall bind them as a sign upon your arm and they shall be an ornament between your eyes. And you shall write them upon the doorposts of your house and on your gates. Deuteronomy, 11:13-21: And it will be that if you hearken to my commandments that I command you today, to love the Lord, your God, and to serve him with all your hearts and all your souls. And I will place rain for your land in its proper time, the early and the late rains, that you may gather in your grain, your wine, and your oil. And I will provide grass in your field for your cattle, and you will eat and you will be satisfied. Watch yourselves, lest your heart be seduced and you turn astray and serve other gods, and prostrate yourselves to them. And the wrath of God will be upon you, and he will restrain the heaven and there will be no rain, and the ground will not yield its produce, and you will be lost quickly from upon the good land that God gives you. And you shall place these words of mine on your hearts and on your souls, and you shall bind them as a sign upon your arms and they shall be ornaments between your eyes. And you shall teach them to your children to discuss them, when you sit in your house and when you go on the way, and when you lie down and when rise up. And you shall write them upon the doorposts of your house and upon your gates, in order to prolong your days and the days of your children upon the good land that God swore to your fathers to give them, like the days of Heaven over earth. Holiday Decorations - Reasonable Restrictions Reasonable Regulations . Homeowner associations can control holiday lighting for religious purposes, provided such control is exercised through neutral, generally applicable laws that only incidentally burden the exercise of religion. ( Manning v. Powers , 281 F.Supp.3d 953) However, if the association&#39;s rules treat any comparable secular activity more favorably than religious exercise, such rules may not be considered neutral and generally applicable and may, therefore, be subject to strict scrutiny under the Free Exercise Clause. ( We the Patriots United States v. Conn. Office of Early Childhood Dev ., 76 F.4th 130) Any rules that treat secular activities more favorably than religious exercise may be subject to strict scrutiny under the Free Exercise Clause.&nbsp;Subject to the above, boards may adopt reasonable rules limiting when owners can start decorating and how long decorations can remain up after the holiday has passed. Common Area Displays .&nbsp;Associations can decorate the common areas for religious holidays, such as Christmas and Hanukkah. The First Amendment&#39;s &quot;separation of church and state&quot; does not apply to homeowner associations. In addition, boards should allow members to decorate their homes and balconies for the holidays. Religious Discrimination .&nbsp;A 2024 case heard by the Ninth Circuit involved Christmas decorations. The Plaintiff (Morris) hosted a large Christmas event outside his home and wanted to continue the tradition when he and his wife moved to a new neighborhood governed by an association. The board drafted a letter to Morris expressing concern because some residents were avowed atheists, and their Christmas display would attract riff-raff like those by WalMart. Before it was sent, the letter was toned down to eliminate references to atheists and riff-raff. Instead, it expressed concerns for residents who were not Christians. In addition, the board held a meeting painting the Christmas event negatively, and residents voted against allowing it. Morris sued, claiming religious discrimination.&nbsp;A jury found for Morris but the district court granted judgment for the association on some issues. Morris appealed. A Ninth Circuit panel affirmed the district court&#39;s grant of judgment as a matter of law on Morris&#39; claim that the association tolerated threats and harassment targeting Morris. The court found sufficient evidence that the HOA&#39;s conduct interfered with Morris&#39;s rights and was motivated by religious animus. ( Morris v. W. Hayden Estates ) Sukkahs A sukkah is a hut used by religious Jews to symbolize the temporary dwellings Israelites lived in during their forty years of wandering in the desert before reaching the promised land. During the week-long holiday of Sukkot (the Feast of Tabernacles or Festival of Booths), the sukkahs are used for prayer, reading the Torah, eating, and sleeping. Common Area Restrictions . Since most CC&amp;Rs prohibit temporary structures, prohibit alterations to the common areas, and do not allow nuisances, a sukkah would violate the CC&amp;Rs. Constitutional guarantees of religious freedoms do not override CC&amp;R restrictions--the guarantees protect against governmental interference, not private restrictions. Accordingly, there is no constitutional right to build sukkahs in the common areas. Exclusive Use Common Area . Under the U.S. Fair Housing Act, the California Fair Employment and Housing Act, and the Unruh Civil Rights Act, associations cannot discriminate in housing based on one&rsquo;s religion. Associations would likely be required to reasonably accommodate a request to temporarily erect sukkahs on exclusive use balconies and patios. Case Law . There are no California cases on this issue, but there are two in&nbsp;New York. Even though out-of-state cases have no precedence in California, they can be instructive. Both cases involved an Orthodox Jew, Robert Greenberg, who sued his condominium association over his sukkah.&nbsp;In the first case, Greenberg built a sukkah in the common area. In the litigation that followed, the court sided with the association. It found that a sukkah in the common areas violated the CC&amp;Rs. The court commented that Greenberg could satisfy his religious obligations by using a sukkah erected by friends or relatives.&nbsp;Eight years later, Greenberg constructed a sukkah on his balcony. The association again intervened, and litigation followed. ( Greenberg v. Parkridge ) This time, the court sided with Greenberg because his sukkah was on exclusive use common area. Recommendation : Boards should allow Jewish families to erect sukkahs on their exclusive&nbsp;use common area balconies and patios. Associations can regulate sukkahs by limiting their construction to the start of the holiday and requiring their removal the day after the holiday ends. Boards can also require that they be constructed so as not to damage the common areas. Santeria Animal Sacrifice QUESTION: We have a tenant conducting Santeria ceremonies which include the sacrifices of goats, chickens and roosters. On trash days we have seen blood coming from trash bags running into the storm drains. What is the best way to stop these practices? ANSWER : Santería means &ldquo;Way of the Saints.&rdquo; For those who are unfamiliar with Santería, it&#39;s a religion similar to voodoo. It originated in Cuba and combines elements of African paganism, Roman Catholicism and ritualistic animal sacrifice. Adherents worship Catholic saints and use Catholic symbols in their practices, including baptism. (I suspect the Catholic Church is troubled by the usurping of their symbols and practices into a pagan religion.) See&nbsp; Wikipedia &nbsp;and&nbsp; The BBC &nbsp;for more information. Case Law . Although there are no cases involving Santeria and homeowner associations, there are two cases involving cities.&nbsp;In 1993 the City of Hialeah in Florida passed an ordinance to prevent the practice of Santería in the city. The ordinance prohibited the killing of animals in a public or private ritual not for the primary purpose of food consumption. The Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye sued. Based on the First Amendment&#39;s free exercise of religion, the United States Supreme Court declared the ordinance unconstitutional and the church was allowed to conduct animal sacrifices in its church building. ( Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah )&nbsp;In 2009 the City of Euless, Texas passed an ordinance aimed at stopping the practice of Santería in a residence by prohibiting the torture and killing of animals in residential homes. The Court of Appeals ruled that Merced, a&nbsp;Santería&nbsp;priest, was acting within his Constitutional rights when he sacrificed goats and other animals as part of his home-based rituals. The court noted that home sacrifice is &quot;a crucial aspect of Santería, without which Santería would effectively cease to exist.&rdquo; ( José Merced v. City of Euless) Santeria in Homeowners Associations .&nbsp;The cases described above both involved governmental interference with the free exercise of religion. In each case the court found that the object of the laws was to to suppress religiously motivated conduct which is why the courts struck them down. Neither case addressed private restrictions, such as those imposed by homeowners associations. Accordingly, it is possible that CC&amp;R restrictions against any (not just religious) activity that causes a&nbsp; nuisance &nbsp;could withstand legal challenge. Just as private organizations can restrict&nbsp; free speech , they could conceivably restrict religious practices that negatively impact other members. Recommendation : Because this is uncharted territory, boards should consult legal counsel when faced with these kinds of situations. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login