URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/R/Rules-of-CC-R-Interpretation

Rules of CC&R Interpretation You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME R Rules of CC&R Interpretation Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings RULES OF INTERPRETATION Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Governing Documents Bylaws &amp; Articles CC&amp;Rs Gov Docs Hierarchy Proper Terminology Rules of Interpretation Liberally&nbsp; Construed Resolving Conflicts In and Between Governing Documents Although CC&amp;Rs are presumed reasonable, they sometimes have internal conflicts (provisions say opposite things), conflicts between documents (CC&amp;Rs say one thing and the bylaws another), or conflicts between an association&#39;s documents and the Davis-Stirling Act or the Corporations Code. When that occurs, associations should seek legal counsel. In most instances, the following rules of interpretation will apply. Statute is Permissive . If a statute is permissive, for example, owners are allowed to keep domesticated chickens in fenced back yards, but the CC&amp;Rs prohibit keeping farm animals and poultry, the CC&amp;Rs prevail. (Seaton v. Clifford (1972) 24 Cal.App.3d 46, zoning laws cannot impair private or contractual property rights) Statute Overrides . If the statute uses words such as &quot;notwithstanding any provision of the governing documents to the contrary&quot; or any similar language, the statute overrides the association&#39;s CC&amp;Rs. For example, Civil Code &sect; 5605(b) starts with &quot;Notwithstanding more restrictive limitations placed on the board by the governing documents&quot; and then sets a 20% limit on raising regular dues and a 5% limit on special assessments. It&nbsp;means that if your CC&amp;Rs have a 10% cap on regular dues and a 3% cap on special assessments, they were nullified by statute, and the higher limits of 20% and 5% now prevail. Another example is found in Civil Code &sect; 4715(a) : &quot;No governing documents shall prohibit the owner of a separate interest within a common interest development from keeping at least one pet . . .&quot; Statute Defers . If the statute uses words such as &quot;Unless the declaration otherwise provides . . . &quot; or similar language, the CC&amp;Rs will prevail. For example, Civil Code &sect; 4500 states: &quot;Unless the declaration otherwise provides . . . the common area is owned as tenants in common, in equal shares, one for each separate interest.&quot; Frequently, highrise condominiums will assign ownership interest (and the payment of dues) according to the unit&#39;s square footage. If the CC&amp;Rs were silent on the issue, then this statute would assign ownership in equal shares. Another example is found in Civil Code &sect; 5500(a) : &quot;Unless the governing documents impose more stringent standards, the board shall do all of the following: . . .&quot; Statute is Silent . Frequently, the Davis-Stirling Act is silent on which controls--the statute or the CC&amp;Rs, and you must decide from the general language of the statute which controls. For instance, Civil Code &sect; 4800 does not contain any of the language described above. Nonetheless, it clearly controls because of its use of the word shall: &quot;A common interest development shall be managed by an association that may be incorporated or unincorporated.&nbsp;The association may be referred to as an owners&#39; association or a community association.&quot; Hierarchy of Documents . In addition to conflicts between governing documents and various statutes, there may be conflicts within and between an association&#39;s governing documents.&nbsp; The relative priority or&nbsp; hierarchy of the documents often resolves such conflicts . Rules of Document Interpretation There are a number of cases that address the interpretation of CC&amp;Rs: The interpretation of a written instrument, even though it involves what might properly be called questions of fact is essentially a judicial function to be exercised according to the generally accepted canons of interpretation so that the purposes of the instrument may be given effect. ( P V Little Italy, LLC v. MetroWork Condominium Ass&#39;n &nbsp;(2012) 210 Cal.App.4th 132, 144) &nbsp; CC&amp;Rs are interpreted according to the usual rules for the interpretation of contracts [see &quot;Rules of Contract Interpretation&quot; below], with a view toward enforcing the reasonable intent of the parties. ( Nahrstedt v. Lakeside Village (1994) 8 Cal.4th 361, 380-381)&nbsp;The intent of the parties and the object of the deed or restriction should govern, giving the instrument a just and fair interpretation. ( Chee v. Amanda Goldt (2006) 143 Cal.App.4th 1360, 1377) &nbsp; Courts interpret words in their ordinary and popular sense unless a contrary intent is shown. ( Harvey v. The Landing HOA (2008) 162 Cal.App.4th 809, 817; Franklin v. Marie Antoinette (1993) 19 Cal.App.4th 824, 829) &nbsp; CC&amp;Rs are enacted for the mutual benefit of all members of an association and are to be interpreted so as to give effect to the main purpose of the CC&amp;Rs and avoid an interpretation that will make the CC&amp;Rs extraordinary, harsh, unjust, inequitable, or which would result in absurdity. ( Battram v. Emerald Bay (1984) 157 Cal.App.3d 1184, 1189) &nbsp; Courts must consider the CC&amp;Rs as a whole and construe the language in context rather than interpret a provision in isolation. If the contractual language is clear and explicit and does not involve an absurdity, the plain meaning governs. ( Starlight Ridge v. Hunter-Bloor (2009) 177 Cal.App.4th 440, 447) &nbsp; Where two inconsistent provisions govern the same matter, the more specific provision controls over the general provision. ( Code Civ. Proc. &sect; 1859 ; Starlight Ridge v. Hunter-Bloor ) &nbsp; Rules of statutory interpretation govern how to apply a statute incorporating another statute that changes over time. This is analogous to the Latrobe Hills CC&amp;R&#39;s, which incorporated a parcel map that changed over time. ( Christian v. Flora (2008) 164 Cal.App.4th 539, 551) Court Interpretation . If there is no extrinsic evidence bearing on the interpretation of the CC&amp;Rs, it becomes one solely of law ( Estate of Dodge (1971) 6 Cal.3d 311, 318) and is therefore properly determined by the court on summary judgment. ( Milton v. Hudson Sales Corp. (1957) 152 Cal.App.2d 418, 433) We do not defer to the Board&rsquo;s interpretation of the CC&amp;Rs. The interpretation of CC&amp;Rs is a legal question to be decided by the courts, not the Board. CC&amp;Rs are interpreted according to the usual rules for the interpretation of contracts generally, with a view toward enforcing the reasonable intent of the parties. (Harvey, supra, 162 Cal.App.4th at p. 817, 76 Cal.Rptr.3d 41) Normally the meaning of contract language is a legal question. Where, as here, no conflicting parol evidence is introduced concerning the interpretation of the document, &lsquo;construction of the instrument is a question of law, and the appellate court will independently construe the writing. ( Eith v. Ketelhut (2018) 31 Cal.App.5th 1) Rules of Contract Interpretation The courts have treated CC&amp;Rs as contracts for limited purposes. Following are some relevant rules of contract interpretation that may be relevant when interpreting CC&amp;Rs: All contracts, whether public or private, are to be interpreted by the same rules, except as otherwise provided by this Code. (Civ. Code &sect; 1635) A contract must be so interpreted as to give effect to the mutual intention of the parties as it existed at the time of contracting, so far as the same is ascertainable and lawful. (Civ. Code &sect; 1636) For the purpose of ascertaining the intention of the parties to a contract, if otherwise doubtful, the rules given in this Chapter are to be applied. (Civ. Code &sect; 1637) The language of a contract governs its interpretation if the language is clear and explicit and does not involve an absurdity. (Civ. Code &sect; 1638) When a contract is reduced to writing, the intention of the parties is to be ascertained from the writing alone, if possible; subject, however, to the other provisions of this Title. (Civ. Code &sect; 1639) The whole of a contract is to be taken together, so as to give effect to every part, if reasonably practicable, each clause helping to interpret the other. (Civ. Code &sect; 1641) A contract must receive such an interpretation as will make it lawful, operative, definite, reasonable, and capable of being carried into effect, if it can be done without violating the intention of the parties. (Civ. Code &sect; 1643) The words of a contract are to be understood in their ordinary and popular sense rather than according to their strict legal meaning unless used by the parties in a technical sense or unless a special meaning is given to them by usage, in which case the latter must be followed. (Civ. Code &sect; 1644) Technical words are to be interpreted as usually understood by persons in the profession or business to which they relate, unless clearly used in a different sense. (Civ. Code &sect; 1645) A contract is to be interpreted according to the law and usage of the place where it is to be performed; or, if it does not indicate a place of performance, according to the law and usage of the place where it is made. (Civ. Code &sect; 1646) A contract may be explained by reference to the circumstances under which it was made, and the matter to which it relates. (Civ. Code &sect; 1647) However broad may be the terms of a contract, it extends only to those things concerning which it appears that the parties intended to contract. (Civ. Code &sect; 1648) If the terms of a promise are in any respect ambiguous or uncertain, it must be interpreted in the sense in which the promissor believed, at the time of making it, that the promisee understood it. (Civ. Code &sect; 1649) Particular clauses of a contract are subordinate to its general intent. (Civ. Code &sect; 1650) Repugnancy in a contract must be reconciled, if possible, by such an interpretation as will give some effect to the repugnant clauses, subordinate to the general intent and purpose of the whole contract. (Civ. Code &sect; 1652) Words in a contract which are wholly inconsistent with its nature, or with the main intention of the parties, are to be rejected. (Civ. Code &sect; 1653) In cases of uncertainty not removed by the preceding rules, the language of a contract should be interpreted most strongly against the party who caused the uncertainty to exist. (Civ. Code &sect; 1654) Stipulations that are necessary to make a contract reasonable or conformable to usage is implied with respect to matters concerning which the contract manifests no contrary intention. (Civ. Code &sect; 1655) All things that in law or usage are considered as incidental to a contract or as necessary to carry it into effect are implied therefrom unless some of them are expressly mentioned therein when all other things of the same class are deemed to be excluded. (Civ. Code &sect; 1656) If no time is specified for the performance of an act required to be performed, a reasonable time is allowed. If the act is in its nature capable of being done instantly--as, for example, if it consists in the payment of money only--it must be performed immediately upon the thing to be done being exactly ascertained. (Civ. Code &sect; 1657) Recommendation : Note: new cases and statutes may change interpretrations. Boards should seek legal counsel whenever interpretation of CC&amp;Rs or the law are at issue. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login