URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/R/Recording-HOA-Meetings

Recording HOA Meetings You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME R Recording HOA Meetings Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings UNAUTHORIZED RECORDING OF HOA MEETINGS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Boards of Directors Board Meetings Committees Management Open&nbsp;Meetings Executive&nbsp;Sessions Emergency Meetings Zoom&nbsp;Meetings Emails Quorum Minutes Motions and&nbsp;Votes Meeting Notice &amp; Agenda Who Can Attend? Open Forum Recording&nbsp;Meetings Can Members Record Board Meetings? Private Membership Meetings . Boards can record and post their meetings if they wish. However, neither individual board members nor attendees have the right&nbsp;to record board meetings. Association meetings are not public gatherings in the sense that the general public can attend the meetings. They are deemed &quot;public meetings&quot; for members of the association. Under the Open Meeting Act , association members (not the general public) can attend board meetings and address the board. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4925 ) Because they are &quot;board meetings,&quot; boards can set meeting procedures and govern the community&rsquo;s business and affairs. ( SB Liberty v. Isla Verde Ass&#39;n &nbsp;(2013) 217 Cal.App.4th 272, 284) That means boards of directors can adopt rules restricting recordings. Brown Act&nbsp;Does Not Apply . The Davis-Stirling Open Meeting Act governs board meetings and is separate from the Brown Act . No statute or case converts a board meeting of a common interest development into a public gathering and permits the unauthorized recording of those meetings. Civil Code &sect; 4925 allows only two things: (i) a member&#39;s right to attend an open meeting and (ii) their right to speak during an open meeting. There is nothing in the statute that allows members to record HOA meetings. The Brown Act expressly permits the recording of open meetings subject to the Act. ( Govt. Code &sect; 54953.5(a) ) There is no such right in the Davis-Stirling Act. While parts of the Davis-Stirling Act are similar to the Brown Act, the fact that the legislature deleted that point from the Davis-Stirling Act makes it clear they were dealing with private, not public, meetings. Negative Aspects of Owner Recordings Meeting attendees who bring audio or video recorders to board meetings often do so because they are threatening litigation or wish to intimidate others into silence. Members may be reluctant to speak for fear of being dragged into litigation or appearing on internet websites. As a result, members&#39; free speech rights are suppressed by the person doing the recording.&nbsp;Moreover, even though owners attending a meeting may not have an expectation of privacy within the community, they have a reasonable expectation that their conversations and likeness will not be posted on YouTube or other websites open to the general public outside their community. For these reasons, many boards prohibit private recordings, whether audio or video.&nbsp; Recording Confidential Conversations The Penal Code makes it a crime to record confidential conversations without the other person&#39;s consent. However, the prohibition does not apply to open board meetings or membership meetings. Private membership meetings are deemed public forums for the limited purpose of free speech by the membership. ( Damon v. Ocean Hills ) As a result, recording a board or membership meeting does not necessarily violate Penal Code &sect; 632 . Executive Session. It should be noted that executive session meetings &nbsp;are subject to different expectations. Those who attend such meetings clearly expect their conversations to be confidential. Accordingly, any surreptitious taping of such meetings would likely violate the Penal Code. Rules &amp; Penalties Recordings that are not subject to criminal penalties under the State&#39;s Penal Code can still be subject to fines under an association&#39;s rules and regulations, i.e., what is permissible by the state can still be restricted by an association. For example, a city might allow three dogs per household, but an association can, under its own authority, restrict households to one dog. The same applies to recording meetings; boards can adopt rules restricting recordings and penalizing those who violate the rule. Accordingly, boards and committees have the authority to create reasonable rules of conduct for their meetings, such as restrictions on recording&nbsp;and prohibiting foul language. The authority to adopt rules is normally found in the CC&amp;Rs and oftentimes in the articles of incorporation and bylaws. The power to adopt rules has been upheld by the courts ( Rancho Santa Fe Assn. v. Dolan-King ). If boards and committees adopt rules of conduct for their meetings, the rules should be printed on their meeting agendas . Membership Notice . Although meeting rules and penalties are not listed in Civil Code &sect; 4340(a) as an operating rule requiring notice to the membership before their adoption, boards should submit them to the membership for review and comment . Doing so fosters transparency and tends to moderate rules and fines. Preparing Minutes . Boards can record their proceedings to prepare &nbsp;meeting minutes but prohibit third parties from doing so (as judges do in their courtrooms). Associations can also broadcast their open meetings if they wish. Recording Unruly Attendees Boards might choose to record specific meetings to help control unruly attendees. SUMMARY : Because board meetings are the board&#39;s meetings, boards can establish rules for the conduct of their meetings. That means they can disallow members from recording their meetings. In the alternative, boards can choose to record and/or broadcast their meetings. Because board meetings are considered public forums within the association, the board does not need the permission of attendees if it decides to record/broadcast meetings. The reverse is not true. Attendees cannot record the meetings without the board&#39;s permission. Attendees can observe the meeting and address the board during open forum but must follow rules established by the board--no disruptions of the meeting, no recordings, etc. If the board allowed members to record meetings, permission would not be needed from other attendees since the meetings are deemed public forums within the association. Just as judges have the discretion to allow or not allow recording in their courtrooms, boards have the same discretion. If a board adopts a policy of not recording meetings, attendees must put away their cell phones and any other recording devices they might have. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login