URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/R/Recall-Elections

Recall Elections You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME R Recall Elections Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings RECALL ELECTIONS - PROCEDURE Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Petition to Recall Directors Voting Requirement Recall Election Director&nbsp;Elections Acclamation Other Elections Recall&nbsp; Elections Annual, Special &amp; Town Hall&nbsp;Meetings Ballots&nbsp;&amp; Proxies Inspectors of Election &nbsp; Qualifications and Nominations Candidate&nbsp; Statements Quorum Voting Rights &amp; Cumulative Voting Election Rules Giving Notice to the Membership Petition to Recall the Board . If presented with a petition to recall one or more directors, the board has 20 days from receipt of the petition to set the date and give notice of the meeting date selected by the board.&nbsp; If the corporation is a common interest development, as defined in Section 4100 of the Civil Code, the corporation shall cause notice to be given to the members entitled to vote that a meeting will be held at a time fixed by the board not less than 35 nor more than 150 days after receipt of the request. If the notice is not given within 20 days after receipt of the request, the persons entitled to call the meeting may give the notice or the superior court of the proper county shall summarily order the giving of the notice, after notice to the corporation giving it an opportunity to be heard. The court may issue such orders as may be appropriate, including, without limitation, orders designating the time and place of the meeting, the record date for determination of members entitled to vote, and the form of notice. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7511(c) ) Board-Initiated Recall . Boards can call special meetings of the membership for any lawful purpose.&nbsp;( Corp. Code &sect; 7510(e) )&nbsp;It means a board can call a membership meeting for the purpose of removing a fellow director from the board. The board can set a date for a special meeting on its own authority and without the need for a petition from the membership. There are no deadlines for setting a date as with a petition. The board can pick a convenient election date in keeping with a director election timeline, whether by written ballot or electronic.&nbsp; Setting a Meeting Date Without Cumulative Voting Without cumulative voting, the recall of existing directors and the election of replacement directors takes place on one ballot. The election timeline is determined by the method of voting, whether electronic or written. If written ballots are distributed, the special meeting date is set 120 days to 150 in the future, and written ballot guidelines are followed regarding the hiring of an inspector of elections, soliciting nominations for new directors in the event the recall is successful, preparing candidate and voter lists, etc. If electronic balloting is used, the meeting date is set 150 days in the future and electronic balloting guidelines are followed.&nbsp; Setting a Meeting Date With Cumulative Voting &nbsp; Recalling the Entire Board or a Single Director .&nbsp;If the entire board is being recalled, or just a single director, the number of seats that need to be filled is known in advance. All seats will be open if the entire board is recalled or only one seat if a single director is recalled. This is important for those associations that still use cumulative voting . Under these scenarios, the recall of existing directors and election of replacement directors can take place on one ballot. The inspector of elections first tallies the recall votes. If the recall is not successful, the election is over. If the recall is successful, the inspector then tallies the votes for replacement director(s) to determine who is elected to the vacated seat(s). Recalling More than One but Less than All Directors .&nbsp;This is more complicated. For example, in a five-member board where three directors are to be recalled, the number of open positions after a successful recall cannot be known in advance. Two may be recalled, and one is not (or two, or all, or none are recalled). For that reason, you cannot know how many positions to put on the ballot for the replacement director election for purposes of cumulative voting. Here are three options: Sequential Elections . Complete the entire recall election first. If the recall fails, a second election is unnecessary. If one or more directors are recalled, a replacement election is needed. At this point, the correct number of directors is known beforehand. This option ensures complete statutory compliance, compatibility with cumulative voting, and voter certainty at the replacement election. However, if a director replacement election is needed, (a) the time to complete the process is doubled, and (b) if the recall leaves a sub-quorum board, recalled directors should continue to serve until replaced to allow continued association operations. Appointment of recalled directors is prohibited by Corporations Code &sect; 7224(a) . Single Ballot Election . This provides resolution with no hold-over of recalled directors. However, members will not know how many positions must be filled until after casting their ballot. This knowledge can be important for members (a) when deciding whether to run in response to the call for candidates, (b) when deciding for whom to vote on the ballot, and (c) deciding whether to campaign or not since it can&#39;t be known whether the election will be contested until after the ballots are cast. An option for elections without cumulative voting is for the ballot to reflect the maximum number of possible positions to be filled if everyone is recalled and allow a single vote for each position. Then count all votes for all candidates, but award only as many positions as were recalled. Single-ballot elections cannot work with cumulative voting since the number of votes a member is entitled to cast must be &ldquo;equal to the number of directors to be elected,&rdquo; the number of which would be unknown at the time the ballots are delivered. ( Corporations Code &sect; 7615 ) Conducting Business During a Recall Until a board is replaced, it continues to carry out its duties as a board of directors. This means the board continues to pay bills, hold meetings, and make decisions affecting the association. It also means the board appoints an election inspector, sends out ballots, and conducts special meetings for recalls. Quorum Requirements &nbsp; No Super Majority Requirements . Associations with&nbsp; 50 or more members &nbsp;cannot amend their governing documents to increase the recall vote to more than a majority of the votes represented and voting at a duly held meeting at which a quorum is present. ( Lake Lindero HOA v. Barone ) &nbsp; Reduced Quorums.&nbsp; Some associations have&nbsp;reduced quorum&nbsp;provisions in their bylaws, i.e., meetings for the election of directors that have a 50% requirement but are reduced&nbsp;to a lower percentage (such as 25%) when&nbsp;adjourned for lack of quorum.&nbsp;The reduced quorum applies to the approval requirement for the removal of directors for associations with 50 or more members.&nbsp;( Lake Lindero HOA v. Barone ) For example, in an association of 100 members and a quorum requirement of 50%, 50 members must be present in person or by ballot or proxy. Of those 50, 26 must approve the removal of directors. If a&nbsp;quorum is not met, the meeting is adjourned to a later date, and the quorum requirement drops to 25%, then at least 25 members must be present in person or by ballot or proxy. A majority of that number then determines the removal of directors. (If an association has fewer than 50 members, the removal remains the same, i.e., it must be approved by the affirmative vote of a majority of all members entitled to vote&nbsp;despite any reduction in quorum.) Electing Replacement Directors Chair of the Meeting .&nbsp;The&nbsp;president&nbsp;chairs the recall meeting unless the president or the board decides otherwise.&nbsp;By statute, the only authority given to petitioners is to call a meeting, not name who chairs it. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7510(e) ) Electing Directors . Unless otherwise stated in the association&#39;s&nbsp;articles of incorporation&nbsp;or&nbsp;bylaws, the board does not have the authority to replace a director who has been removed by the membership. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7224(a) ) In the event a recall is successful, the election of replacement directors is combined with the recall vote.&nbsp;The Corporations Code does not provide for the permanent removal of directors. So long as the person meets the qualifications of a director, he/she can be elected to the board even if recalled by the membership (provided they nominate&nbsp;themselves during the call for nomninees). Tallying Votes . The inspector of elections first tallies the recall votes. If the recall is not successful, the election is over. If the recall is successful, the inspector then tallies the votes for replacement director(s) to determine who is elected to the vacated seat(s). New Directors Term of Office . If the recall is successful and new directors are elected, the&nbsp; term in office &nbsp;for new directors will be the same as the directors they replace. ( Corp. Code &sect; 7220(b) ) If a board has staggered terms and is recalled, the election of replacement directors requires a determination of which directors get the longest terms. That is determined by the vote count. Those directors receiving the highest number of votes are elected to the open seats with the longest terms.&nbsp;EXAMPLE: Assuming a five-member board with staggered terms is successfully recalled, with three directors having one-year remaining terms and two having one-month remaining terms, the three candidates receiving the highest number of votes fill the seats with one-year terms. The next two elected candidates fill the one-month terms. That means the two newly elected directors with one-month terms must stand for reelection in thirty days. Recall Procedures in Election Rules As part of the&nbsp;Election Rules&nbsp;required by statute, associations should include a section on recall procedures. They should include: Who may and may not be recalled. Requirements for&nbsp;recall petitions. Restrictions on serial petitions. Voting requirements for recalling&nbsp;individual directors and the entire board. Miscellaneous Issues Campaigning Against the Recall . Campaigning&nbsp;is allowed by both sides. Owners may campaign to remove directors from office, and directors may campaign against the recall. However, neither side is allowed to use association funding for their campaigns. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5135 ) Any access to&nbsp; association media &nbsp;must be granted equally. False Statements . If the petitioners make false statements, the board may have a duty to make corrections and advise members of the facts. Legal Counsel . Board members are volunteers and rarely know how to properly handle a recall petition election. As a result, it is common for them to call legal counsel to find out what to do. Following is a sampling of questions boards often must address: If a husband and wife both sign the petition, does it count as one signature or two? Can/should the board verify the signatures? If so, how? Is the petition confidential, or should it be published? How much time do we have to call a recall meeting? How are nominations handled? Do recalled directors have the right to run for the board? Recall Expenses .&nbsp;The association bears the cost of the recall election regardless of the outcome. Record Date .&nbsp;Boards can set a&nbsp; record date &nbsp;for determining voting rights. Recommendation : Associations should seek legal counsel when faced with a petition to recall one or more directors. Associations&nbsp;should amend their governing documents to (i) eliminate cumulative voting, (ii) limit abusive recall petitions, (iii) eliminate proxies, and (iv) eliminate quorum requirements for the election of directors. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login