URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/R/Roberts-Rules

Roberts Rules of Order You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME R Roberts Rules Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings ROBERT'S RULES OF ORDER Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Robert&#39;s Rules of Order were written by General Henry Robert and first published in 1876. He prepared rules of conduct for meetings to establish an orderly manner for everyone to be heard and make decisions. Robert&#39;s Rules have been widely adopted by private organizations throughout the world and seem to be the procedure of choice for homeowner association meetings. Board &amp; Committee Meetings . There is no requirement that board and committee meetings be conducted under Robert&#39;s Rules or any other system of parliamentary procedure.&nbsp;Strict adherence to Robert&#39;s Rules in board meetings can be unwieldy. Boards are free to use more flexible procedures, unless the association&#39;s governing documents require otherwise. As provided for in Robert&#39;s Rules, board meetings where there are not more than a dozen directors present, &quot;some of the formality that is necessary in a large assembly would hinder business.&quot; Accordingly: Directors are not required to obtain the floor before making motions or speaking. Motions need not be seconded. There is no limit to the number of times a director can speak to a question, and motions to close or limit debate generally should not be entertained. Informal discussion of a subject is permitted while no motion is pending. Sometimes, when a proposal is perfectly clear to all present, a vote can be taken without a motion&rsquo;s having been introduced. The chair need not rise while putting questions to vote. The chair can speak in discussion without rising or leaving the chair; and, subject to rule or custom within the particular board he usually can make motions and usually vote on all questions. Accordingly, most boards loosely follow Robert&#39;s Rules when conducting their meetings and do not use a parliamentarian. Membership Meetings . Unlike board and committee meetings, membership meetings (whether annual or special) must be conducted in accordance with a recognized system of parliamentary procedure. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5000(a) .) Although Robert&#39;s Rules of Order is the most widely used system, others may be used. As a practical matter, most association meetings are not conducted in accordance with any system of parliamentary procedure unless the meetings become contentious, at which point parliamentary procedures are invoked. &nbsp; Adjournment : An&nbsp; adjournment&nbsp; can either be a continuation or termination of a meeting, depending on how it is used. Chair : The chair is the person presiding over the board meeting, normally the president. Entertain : The president entertains a motion when s/he accepts or allows it to be brought before the board. Sometimes when the president sees the need for a particular motion to be made, s/he may state that s/he will entertain the particular motion. For example, if everyone looks like they are about to fall asleep, the president can suggest that s/he will entertain a recess for ten minutes. A senator can then make the suggested motion by merely saying, &quot;I so move.&quot; Floor : A person who has been granted the right to speak by the president has obtained the floor. Old Business . The old term &quot;Old Business&quot; has been replaced with &quot;Unfinished Business&quot; since old business incorrectly suggests further consideration of matters that have been finally disposed of. (Robert&#39;s Rules, 11th ed., p. 358.) Out of order : &nbsp;Motions, debate, or actions that are not allowed under the rules of a given situation are out of order. Motions . &nbsp;Motions are proposals for action by the Board and can only be made by directors. See&nbsp; making motions . Pending : A pending motion is one that has been brought before the board and which has not yet been disposed of. A motion can be disposed of in many ways, including the following: referring the question to a committee, postponing the question, or voting to pass or defeat the motion. An immediately pending motion is the one being considered at the time in question. Question : The immediately pending motion is often referred to as the question. Quorum : A quorum is the minimum number of directors required at a meeting to conduct business. Recess : A recess is a break in a meeting. Yield : A motion of low precedence yields to one of higher precedence. RONR Citation . RONR citations on this website refers to Robert&#39;s Rules of Order Newly Revised, 12th edition.&nbsp; Resources . A simple 16-page illustrated guideline which serves as a basic introduction to parliamentary procedure is the A-B-C&#39;s of Parliamentary Procedure . Another easy to understand guide is the Complete Idiot&#39;s Guide to Parliamentary Procedure by Jim Slaughter. Both can be ordered through Amazon.com as can Robert&#39;s Rules of Order . Directors can also attend classes offered through the Community Associations Institute where they can learn the basics of parliamentary procedure. Additionally, boards can ask for guidance from their managers and legal counsel, most of whom have a working knowledge of running meetings. Both CAI and CACM teach this topic in their certification programs for managers. Many recording secretaries who take the minutes for board meetings also have a working knowledge of parliamentary procedure and can assist boards with their meetings. And last but not least, YouTube has a number of video training sessions on how to run meetings. Parliamentarian . For more formal membership meetings, some associations use a professional parliamentarian to assist with their meetings. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login