URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/R/Reserve-Studies-Funding

Reserve Studies & Funding You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME R Reserve Studies & Funding Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings HOA RESERVE STUDIES Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Annual Budgets Collections Audits &amp; Reviews Bank Accounts &amp; Loans Reserves Taxes Reserve Studies Duty to&nbsp; Fund Reserves Reserve Transfers &amp; Borrowing Investing Reserve Funds Capital&nbsp;Improvements Reserve&nbsp;Companies &nbsp;&nbsp; Managing Reserves Reserve Studies Are Required All associations, regardless of size, must prepare a reserve study ( Civ. Code &sect; 5550 ) unless the total replacement costs are less than 50% of the gross budget of the association, excluding the association&rsquo;s reserve account for that period. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5550(a) )&nbsp;The purpose of a reserve fund is to repair, replace, restore, or maintain the major common area components. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5510(b) ; &sect; 5565(b)(1) ) The reserve study process can be simplified as follows: A reserve company retained by the board identifies all major common area components, their cost to repair or replace them, and their remaining life span. The reserve company calculates how much money is needed and when. The board decides how to fund the reserves--whether through increased assessment contributions, special assessments, or a combination of the two. The funding plan is annually disclosed to the membership in the year-end budgeting process. Small Associations . Small residential associations, even as small as two units, must perform reserve studies if they have common areas--unless the total replacement costs are less than 50% of the annual gross budget. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5550(a) ) Visual Inspection Every Three Years At least once every three years, the board of directors shall cause to be conducted a reasonably competent and diligent visual inspection of the accessible areas of the major components that the association is obligated to repair, replace, restore, or maintain. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5550(a) )&nbsp;&quot;Diligent&quot; is not defined in the statute but is more than a cursory inspection. Black&#39;s Law Dictionary defines diligent as &quot;attentive and persistent in doing a thing.&quot; In addition to &quot;diligent,&quot; we must factor in what precedes diligent, i.e., &ldquo;reasonably competent,&quot; and what follows, &quot;accessible areas.&quot; Reasonably Competent . &quot;Reasonably competent&quot; does not require a particular professional license, but two national credentials are available to reserve study professionals. One is the&nbsp; Professional Reserve Analyst &nbsp;(PRA) administered by the Association of Professional Reserve Analysts (APRA). The second is the&nbsp; Reserve Specialist &nbsp;(RS) administered by the Community Associations Institute. Both organizations require a demonstrated background of training and experience in properly preparing reserve studies before they issue designations. &nbsp; Accessible . Inspection of &quot;accessible&quot; areas does not mean tearing off roofs and opening walls. In my opinion, it means getting onto roofs, entering elevator rooms, opening electrical panels, and opening equipment service panels (such as on boilers) to obtain equipment information. NOTE:&nbsp; Elevated structures &nbsp;are treated differently. &nbsp; Disclosure . Finally, industry standards require that reserve professionals disclose whether a complete inspection or representative sampling was used, whether field measurements or plans/schematic take-offs were utilized, and whether destructive testing was employed. Annual Updates .&nbsp; The allocation of reserve items is not set in stone. Allocations are only projections and are subject to revision annually as roofs, boilers, etc., wear out at their own rates. As a result, boards must review the reserve study, or cause it to be reviewed, annually and implement appropriate adjustments to the reserve account requirements.&nbsp; (Civ. Code &sect; 5550(a) ) Elevated Structure Inspections Even though elevated structure inspections have a 9-year inspection cycle , they must be included in the association&#39;s reserve study and visually inspected every three years. Inventory of Major Components&nbsp; A reserve study is not truly a &quot;study&quot; of the roofs, boilers, streets, etc. Instead, it is a list of major common area components with an estimate of their remaining useful life. As provided for in&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 5510(b) , an association&#39;s reserve study must contain the following reserve component details: Components . The study must identify major common area components that the association must repair that have a remaining useful life of less than 30 years. Examples are roofs, painting, pool heaters, and asphalt repairs/replacement.&nbsp; &nbsp; Useful Life .&nbsp; The study must identify the probable remaining useful life of the components. These are estimates since it is impossible to know the true remaining life of each component. Lifespans will vary depending on (i) the original quality of the component itself and (ii) whether the association has a program of regular preventative maintenance. &nbsp; Repair Costs . An estimate of the future replacement costs of components must be included. Inflation should be factored into the estimate. &nbsp; Reserve Contributions . An estimate of the total annual contribution necessary to defray the cost to repair, replace, restore, or maintain the components identified in paragraph (1) during and at the end of their useful life, after subtracting total reserve funds as of the date of the study. &nbsp; Funding Plan.&nbsp; The study must contain a&nbsp; reserve funding plan &nbsp;to pay for future component replacement. The plan might involve monthly contributions to the reserve fund or a combination of contributions and&nbsp; special assessments . Allowances . The study should list the items for major components with an unknown life, such as sidewalk repairs, plumbing repairs , slope failures, perimeter block wall repairs, etc., and add a reasonable dollar amount as a contingency. For example, an association with many slopes will likely experience a slope failure. The board should set aside a reasonable amount for a single failure, not a dozen. If and when a failure occurs, funds are available. Once repairs are made, the &quot;allowance&quot; for that item can be replenished.&nbsp; Additional Information For additional information on reserve studies, see &quot; An Explanation of CAI&#39;s Reserve Study Standards .&quot; It covers (i) reserve component inventories, (ii) capital improvements, (iii) construction defects, (iv) an explanation on how to calculate percent funded, (v) baseline funding, threshold, and full funding.&nbsp; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login