URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/R/Rental-Restrictions

Rental Restrictions You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME R Rental Restrictions Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings RENT RESTRICTIONS IN HOAs Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Governing Documents Bylaws &amp; Articles CC&amp;Rs CC&amp;Rs Amendments&nbsp; &amp; Restatements Condo Plan Rent Restrictions Short-Term Rentals Room&nbsp;&amp; Occupancy Restrictions Types of Rent Restrictions Beginning January 1, 2021, associations must amend their governing documents to conform to the following rental caps and lease terms. Failure to amend governing documents to conform to these standards by July 1, 2022, could result in a fine of $1,000. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4741(f)&amp;(g) ) Existing Rental Cap . This limits the number of units in a development that can be leased. For example, no more than 10% of the units in the development can be rented at any one time. Beginning January 1, 2021, rent caps that are more restrictive than 25% are unenforceable, such as 10%, 15%, or 20%. All associations with rent caps were required to amend their governing documents to conform to 25%. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4741(b) ) Board can adjust it to 25% to conform to new rental requirements. Add a Rental Cap . If an association does not have a rental cap and wants to add one, section 4740 of the Civil Code applies. The restriction will only apply to owners who purchase after the restriction is recorded. Lease Term Requirement .&nbsp; Civil&nbsp;Code &sect; 4741(c) &nbsp;expressly allows governing documents to prohibit transient or short-term rentals for 30&nbsp;days or less. (This statute codifies the 2008 Mission Shores v. Pheil case, which held that a CC&amp;R provision requiring rentals to be at least 30&nbsp;days is reasonable.)&nbsp; Ownership Requirement . This restriction discourages investors from buying up units in a development and renting them out by requiring buyers of units to own/reside in their residence for a period of time (usually one, two, or three years) before they can rent it out. This restriction is no longer enforceable under Civil Code &sect; 4741 . Occupancy Restrictions . Associations can still impose occupancy restrictions. Room Rentals &amp; Subleasing . Subleasing restrictions are not affected, but room rental restrictions could&nbsp;be. Lender, FHA &amp; Fannie Mae Requirements . For lending purposes, Fannie Mae requires developments have at least 51% owner occupancy. For reporting purposes, When it comes to companies or corporations that own units in a condominium development, there are different opinions on how to count them. Some argue that companies cannot occupy a unit; therefore, a unit owned by a limited liability company (LLC) or corporation should be counted as a rental. Others argue that a company can designate who can occupy the unit on behalf of the company without rent payments being involved. Accordingly, it depends on the arrangements the company has with the occupant. Boards should consult HOA legal counsel on this issue. Insurance Carriers &amp; Lenders .&nbsp; The insurance industry has also recognized the problems associated with renters and takes notice when the rental percentage reaches 30-35%. Many preferred carriers draw the line at this percentage because claims histories have shown that associations with high rental populations have more claims. As a result, associations with excessive rentals are charged higher premiums. Lenders routinely ask for the percentage of rentals in a development since a high percentage depresses market values. Power to Regulate . Courts have recognized that homeowner associations can regulate rentals. ( Nahrstedt v. Lakeside Village (1994) 8 Cal.4th 361, 374, fn. 6, &quot;The power to regulate pertains to a wide spectrum of activities, such as the volume of playing music, hours of social gatherings, use of patio furniture and barbecued, and rental of units&quot;; Colony Hill v. Ghamaty (2006) 143 Cal.App.4th 1156, 1169 (association has power &quot;to maintain its family character by prohibiting uses other than for single-family dwelling purposes.&quot;); City of Oceanside v. McKenna ( 1989) 215 Cal.App.3d 1420; Liebler v. Point Loma Tennis Club (1995) 40 Cal.App.4th 1600, 1611) Room rentals are included. Adopting Rent Restrictions If associations wish to adopt rental restrictions, they should do so via an amendment to the CC&amp;Rs approved by the membership. Such restrictions are effective upon recordation and affect all future owners. Depending on the specific rule or regulation, the board of directors can adopt some rental regulations without a membership vote. Boards should consult with legal counsel before doing so. Date of Ownership .&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 4740 &nbsp;exempts owners from rent prohibitions unless the prohibition was in effect before the owner bought into the development. Coastal Associations . Condominium associations along the coast that want to tighten their restrictions on short-term rentals must consider California Coastal Commission requirements. The Mandalay Shores Association adopted a rule requiring rentals to be for a minimum of 30 days. The Coastal Commission demanded the association cease enforcement of its restriction, alleging the requirement constituted a &ldquo;development&rdquo; that affected the density and intensity of the use of the coastal area, which required a coastal permit. The trial court disagreed and found that a 30-day minimum was not a &ldquo;development.&rdquo; However, the court of appeal unexpectedly reversed, stating, &quot;The decision to ban or regulate STRs must be made by the City and Coastal Commission, not a homeowner&rsquo;s association.&quot; ( Greenfield v. Mandalay Shores ) Accordingly, coastal associations should consult legal counsel when dealing with short-term rentals. Disclose the Restriction . If an association has a restriction in the governing documents limiting the occupancy, residency, or use of a separate interest based on&nbsp;age, owners must, as soon as practicable before the transfer of title, provide notice of the restriction to the prospective purchaser. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4525(a)(2) ) Lease Agreements Notice of Renter . Before owners lease&nbsp;their units&nbsp;to a tenant, they must provide the association with the name and contact information of the tenant. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 4740(c) ) Tenant Defined . A tenant is not the same as a guest. Tenants have a specific status under the law and have the right to full possession and control of the unit they rent, subject to the terms of their lease or rental agreement. Guests have no possessory rights. Section 1940 of the Civil Code defines tenants as &ldquo;persons who hire dwelling units...including tenants, lessees, boarders, lodgers, and others...&quot;&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 1925 &nbsp;defines hiring as &ldquo;a contract by which one gives to another the temporary possession and use of property, other than money, for reward, and the latter agrees to return the same to the former at a future time.&rdquo; Rent Defined . Rent is defined as consideration for the use or occupation of property. ( Black&#39;s Law Dictionary .) Consideration can be&nbsp;money, goods, services, or other value. Accordingly, the gratitude of a relative or a mistress&#39;s affection could qualify as rent, and the occupant is deemed a tenant.&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 1951 &nbsp;defines rent as &ldquo;charges equivalent to rent.&rdquo; Copy of Lease .&nbsp; If an association&#39;s governing documents require that lease agreements be for a particular period (banning&nbsp;short-term rentals&nbsp;is common), the only way it can verify compliance is to require the landlord to provide a copy of the signed lease agreement. NOTE: See changes in&nbsp;allowable rent restrictions. To show compliance with the restriction, the only relevant information is an executed agreement bearing the names of the parties, the date of the agreement, the lease term, and signatures. Accordingly, you can&nbsp;remove&nbsp;financial and personal information&nbsp;from the agreement before submitting it to the association. Lease Addendums Associations can adopt&nbsp;lease addendums (sometimes called&nbsp; supplemental lease &nbsp;agreements), which assign rent to the association if the landlord becomes delinquent. Whenever a unit is leased, the owner and tenant are required to sign the association&#39;s lease addendum that requires, among other things, (i) the lease be for the entire unit; (ii) no assignments or subleases are allowed; (iii) the lease is for not less than thirty (30) days; (iv) tenant agrees to comply with the association&rsquo;s governing documents and be subject to its disciplinary procedures; (vi) owner assigns rents from his unit to the association in the event he becomes delinquent; and (vii) tenant agrees to pay the owner&#39;s assessments should he become delinquent. Renter&#39;s Rights See &quot; Renter&#39;s Rights &quot; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can&nbsp; contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the&nbsp; Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login