URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/R/Recounts-Runoff-Elections

Recounts & Runoff Elections You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME R Recounts & Runoff Elections Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings RECOUNTS AND RUNOFF ELECTIONS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Vote Recounts&nbsp; Many times elections are decided by a single vote. Although the Inspector of Elections determines the outcome of the election ( Civ. Code &sect; 5110(c)(7) ) one or more candidates can request a recount. In the event of a tie vote, a recount should be automatic.&nbsp;A &quot;recount&quot; is an official count by the Inspector which may change the outcome of the original count. If the tabulation changes, the Inspector then announces the new numbers which become the official outcome of the election.&nbsp;Neither the Davis-Stirling Act nor the Corporations Code addresses recounts. Although not binding on homeowner association elections, California&#39;s Elections Code provides useful guidelines on how recounts can be handled by associations.&nbsp; The request must be in writing. (EC &sect; 15620.) The request be lodged within five days of the announcement of the election results. (EC &sect; 15620.) The person seeking the recount must deposit with the elections official an amount to cover the cost of the recount. If the recount changes the outcome of the election, the monies shall be returned to the person. If the recount does not change the election results, any funds in excess of the cost of the recount shall be returned. (EC &sect; 15624.) The recount shall be conducted under the supervision of the elections official. (EC &sect; 15625.) The recount shall be commenced not more than seven days following receipt of the request by the elections official, weekends and holidays excepted. (EC &sect; 15626.) A notice stating the date and place of the recount must be posted and all candidates notified. (EC &sect; 15628) The recount must be conducted publicly. (EC &sect; 15629.) Ballot may not be touched or handled without the express consent of and under the supervision of the elections official. (EC &sect; 15630.) The results of the recount shall be posted. (EC &sect; 15633.) Written Demand . &nbsp;Using the Elections Code as a guideline, any member of the association can demand a recount provided (i) it is made in writing to the Inspector of Elections within five days after the election results have been announced and (ii) the member pays in advance for the cost of the recount. Monies advanced by the member shall be refunded if the outcome of the election is changed by the recount. Recount Procedure . The recount must commence not more than seven days following the request for the recount must be supervised by the Inspector of Elections. The recount may be observed by members of the association. No election materials may be touched or handled by any person without the express consent of the Inspector of Elections and under the supervision of the Inspector. Results Published . The results of the recount must be reported to the board of directors and the membership and must be recorded in the minutes of the next board meeting. The Cost . As a rule, the person asking for a recount bears the cost. Until last year, not even the State of California had a policy for state-funded recounts.&nbsp;The cost will depend on the size of the association (the number of ballots cast) and whether the recount is done by machine or by hand.&nbsp; Recommendation : Boards should&nbsp; amend their election rules &nbsp;to address recounts and tie votes. Tie Vote:&nbsp; Coin Toss and Runoff Elections The Davis-Stirling Act does not address how associations should handle elections when two or more candidates receive the same number of votes. If there is a tie vote, the inspector can immediately recount ballots and tally votes. As provided in&nbsp; Civil Code 5110(c) , inspectors have the authority to determine the tabulated results of the election and to perform any acts as may be proper to conduct the election with fairness. In addition, the board could authorize a recount since it would be less expensive than a run-off election.&nbsp; If the association&rsquo;s governing documents specify a method for breaking a tie, that method must be used.&nbsp;If the bylaws or election rules are silent, the winner can be determined by flipping a coin for two-way ties, but only if both candidates agree. In a three-way tie, the candidates can either draw straws or draw a name from a bowl to determine the winner, but only if all agree.&nbsp;If one or more candidates demand a runnoff election, one must be held.&nbsp;For guidance, we can turn to California&#39;s Elections Code. It states a special runoff election must be held not less than 40 nor more than 125 days after the tie vote.&nbsp; (Elections Code&nbsp;&sect; 15651 .) Go to Election Menu &nbsp; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login