URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/R/Replacing-Water-Lines

Replacing Water Lines You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME R Replacing Water Lines Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings REPIPING WATER LINES Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Maintenance Pest Control Plumbing Balcony Inspections Asbestos &amp; Mold Reserves Water Damage Liability Water Lines Plumbing&nbsp;Fixtures Drain &amp; Sewer&nbsp; Lines Washer-Dryer Retrofit Right&nbsp;of Entry Cause of Pipe Failure Many factors affect the life expectancy of plumbing systems. Manufacturing Defects . Residual stress from improper manufacturing increases the chance of cracking and pinhole leaks later on.&nbsp; Improper Installation. &nbsp;Premature failure can result if lines are improperly installed. This includes contact with concrete or dissimilar metals, lack of pipe support, and poor workmanship. Design Defects . Undersized drain lines can lead to clogs, excessive corrosion and premature failure. Location . Drain lines on ground floors suffer from the combined gravitational effects of cumulative use and corrosion. Improper Use . Garbage disposals introduce grease and food residues which adhere to the interior walls of pipes causing stoppages and backups, and often premature corrosion.&nbsp;&nbsp; Corrosion . All metals corrode in contact with water, air and chemicals. Corrosion can be internal such as through contact with water and caustic cleaning chemicals, and external such as from salt air with proximity to the ocean or contact with acidic or alkaline soils.&nbsp; Patterns of Occupancy . In occupied homes, pipes maintain a consistent moist environment. Homes which are used only sporadically, pipes can dry out, which leads to cracking.&nbsp;Piping in high-population buildings typically sees an accumulation of more corrosion and buildup.&nbsp; Lack of Maintenance .&nbsp; Lack of routine preventive maintenance, such as hydrojetting of main sewer lines, can lead to premature failure. Highrise Considerations . A midrise or highrise building adds another level of complexity with sophisticated mechanical systems, utilizing pumps to distribute flow throughout the buildings through large diameter steel piping. Each part of the system is prone to failure and has the potential for catastrophic water damage. Telltale Maintenance Patterns . &nbsp;A good way to determine whether the pipes in your building are nearing their life expectancy is to watch for emerging maintenance patterns. There will be increasingly more pinhole leaks, clogs and backups, more homeowner complaints, and more service calls. Particularly if you are managing resultant mold due to water damage from plumbing leaks, it may be time to evaluate replacing the system as a whole rather than making spot repairs. Partial Repairs If boards choose to replace some lines with copper and not others, mixing copper with galvanized can lead to galvanic corrosion between the dissimilar metals which will speed the deterioration of the pipes. As a result, partial replacement of galvanized lines is not a permanent solution to the problem. Sometimes plumbing in an older building can be replaced gradually. Following is a program implemented by one association: Because our building is 35 years old, we assume a plumbing drain problem inside a unit extends to the entire line. So instead of repairing the immediate problem, we replace the line serving the unit and the units above and below. We allocate $8,000 per year for unidentified plumbing work in the Reserve Study. We attack the problem from the outside of the building wherever possible to minimize the inconvenience of repairs inside units. This almost always requires removal and replacement of stucco, but it is no worse than cabinet, drywall, painting inside the unit. It is much easier to coordinate work on the outside which means it gets done sooner. This policy has virtually eliminated weekend plumbing emergencies. -Mike G. Reserving for Pipe Replacements A &ldquo;lifetime building component&rdquo; may be a correct reserve study term but is actually a misnomer, in that nothing lasts forever. This is particularly true of piping systems. To generalize, galvanized steel pipes have a life expectancy of 30-50 years, copper 40-75 years, cast iron 50 to 75 years but it is not unusual to see pipes failing prematurely. Because most reserve studies have a horizon of only 30 years, HOAs rarely plan for pipe replacement. Unfortunately, that can result in system failures, water damage to buildings and personal property, mold, and loss of use. Insurance Many insurance carriers will not pay for damage from water leaks if it determines that the damage was due to the board&#39;s failure to replace the failing lines. Insurance will normally pay for sudden unexpected losses but not losses where the board knew about the problem and took no action to correct it. Other carriers will pay for the damage but by the third or fourth leak, they will cancel the policy. Once canceled, the premiums for new insurance will be significantly higher. Repiping Projects Evaluation methods include videoing and hydrojetting sewer and storm drain lines, physical inspection, destructive testing, pipe sampling and analysis and prototype repairs to typical units. Pipe replacement costs vary significantly due to the accessibility problems. The costs associated with opening walls in units to expose the plumbing lines and repairing those walls can be greater than the pipe replacement itself. There are many options, and combinations of options, that should be considered in a pipe replacement project that can be made only after a thorough investigation. Alternative Technologies. &nbsp;Pipe coating and lining are attractive options because they do not entail expensive destruction and renovation within units. These processes all need to be carefully considered for their appropriateness. Often, a combination of strategies is the best approach. Hazardous materials &nbsp;are often encountered in re-piping projects. It is wise in the planning phase prior to establishing the budget, to incorporate a pre-demolition survey so as to determine the prevalence of hazardous materials. If there has been any type of pipe failure, with resultant water damage, anticipate mold. It is not unusual for mold remediation to add a 25% or more to the total cost of a project. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login