URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/R/regulatingdogs

Regulating Dogs You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME R Regulating Dogs Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings REGULATING DOGS IN HOAs Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Rules &amp; Regulations Renters Pets Daycare, Drones, Flags Vehicles Clubhouse, Gym, Pool Nuisance Issues Clotheslines, Gardens, Turf &nbsp; Regulating Pets Dogs Cats Snakes Renter&#39;s Pets Service&nbsp; Animals Nuisance Barking Definitions can be limited to excessive barking or expanded to include other issues. Following are some examples: Example #1 &nbsp; Nuisance noise from a dog is defined as barking or whining for more than 5 minutes in any 1-hour period. Example #2 &nbsp; Excessive barking is barking that is persistent and occurs for an extended period of time or on a repeated basis. When determining if barking is a violation, consideration will be given to the time of day, duration, and frequency of barking. Example #3 &nbsp; No animal shall be allowed to unreasonably annoy residents, to endanger the life or health of other animals or persons, or to substantially interfere with the quiet enjoyment of others. Pet owners shall be deemed in violation if their pets: consistently or constantly makes excessive noise; cause damage to or destruction of another&#39;s property; cause unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive conditions, including the fouling of the air by offensive odor emanating from excessive excrement; or create a pest, parasite, or scavenger control problem that is not effectively treated. Example #4 &nbsp; Animals will be deemed a nuisance that commit acts which include, but are not limited to, the following: Any dog that chases, runs after, or jumps at vehicles moving on streets and alleys. Any dog that attacks, bites, or injures a person or snaps, growls, snarls, jumps upon, or otherwise threatens persons without provocation. These acts shall be considered a violation whether or not the dog is confined by a fence, chain, or leash or under the voice control of a responsible person. Any animal that howls, yelps, whines, or barks in such a manner as to unreasonably disturb any person. Any animal that feeds from, turns over, or disturbs garbage containers. Any animal that scratches or digs in flowerbeds or otherwise damages the property of another owner. Any dog or cat that goes onto the property of another or onto common areas to attack another animal or fowl. Cats or dogs that crawl upon, sleep on, scratch, or otherwise soil the property of another. Once a complaint is made, boards will often send a letter to the pet owner letting him/her know that neighbors have complained about the barking. If the letter from the board is a warning only, the board is not required to identify the source of the complaint. If the problem continues, the board must hold a hearing with the owner and decide that a nuisance exists. Once that is done, penalties can range from fines/penalties to&nbsp;muzzling dogs&nbsp;deemed&nbsp;aggressive&nbsp;to banishing nuisance animals from the association. Dangerous Dogs A problem for boards is deciding when a dog is dangerous.&nbsp;For purposes of defining a &quot;vicious&quot; or &quot;dangerous&quot; dog when drafting rules, boards should consider one of the following sample definitions: Per the CDC, the following breeds were involved in the most dog bite fatalities in the U.S. 1979 - 1998: Pit Bull - 76 Rottweiler - 44 German Shepherd - 27 Husky-type 21 Malamute - 15 Wolf-dog hybrid - 14 Mixed breed - 12 Chow - 11 Doberman - 10 Great Dane - 8 St. Bernard 8&nbsp; Any dog that, when unprovoked, inflicts bites or attacks a human being or domestic animal or in a vicious or terrorizing manner approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack in the association&#39;s common areas; or Any dog with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury, or to otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or Any dog that engages in, or is found to have been trained to engage in, exhibitions of dog fighting; or Any dog at large found to attack, menace, chase, display threatening or aggressive behavior, or otherwise threaten or endanger the safety of any domestic animal or person. Condominium associations are particularly vulnerable to aggressive dogs because interior common hallways and elevators bring owners into close contact with dogs. Owners should not have to squeeze against hallway walls to get out of a dog&#39;s way or avoid taking an elevator because a 130-pound Rottweiler is on it. Large, aggressive dogs can maim and kill in a matter of seconds. The very young and the very old are especially vulnerable to attack. For the safety of the membership, many associations impose restrictions on the size and breeds of animals. What is a Pit Bull? Section 43(a) of the San Francisco Health Code defines a pit bull as including: &quot;...any dog that is an American Pit Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, or any dog displaying the physical traits of any one or more of the above breeds, or any dog exhibiting those distinguishing characteristics that conform to the standards established by the American Kennel Club (&lsquo;AKC&rsquo;) or United Kennel Club (&lsquo;UKC&rsquo;) for any of the above breeds.&quot; This language had been upheld in two cases in which the federal district courts rejected the contention that the language was vague: &nbsp;American Canine Foundation v. Sun &nbsp;(N.D. Cal., Mar. 21, 2007, No. C-06-4713MMC) 2007 WL 878573 at page 9;&nbsp; Coalition of Human Advocates for K9&rsquo;s and Owners v. City and County of San Francisco &nbsp;(N.D. Cal., Feb. 27, 2007, No. C-06-1887 MMC) 2007 WL 641197, at pages 11-12.&nbsp;In &nbsp;Tracey v. Solesky &nbsp;50 A.3d 1075 (2012), the Maryland Court of Appeals concluded that &quot;Today, the majority holds that a pit bull or any dog with a trace of pit bull ancestry...shall be deemed henceforth vicious and inherently dangerous as a matter of law.&quot; A common definition of pit bull used by California counties is: &ldquo;Pit bull&rdquo; includes any dog that is a Bull Terrier, Miniature Bull Terrier, American Pit Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier, Staffordshire Bull Terrier, or any dog that exhibits physical traits of any one or more of the above breeds or any dog exhibiting those distinguishing characteristics which conform to the standards established by the American Kennel Club (&ldquo;AKC&rdquo;), United Kennel Club (&ldquo;UKC&rdquo;), or American Dog Breeders Association (&ldquo;ADBA&rdquo;) for any of the above breeds. These standards are listed on the clubs&rsquo; websites. Although pit bulls can be gentle and don&#39;t bite as often as other dogs, the injuries can be catastrophic when they do attack. That is because pit bulls have enormous jaw strength and a &quot;hold and shake&quot; bite style that often inflicts permanent and disfiguring injuries. Even though pit bulls only make up 5% of the U.S. dog population, they dominate in fatal attacks nationwide. As a result, many governmental agencies restrict dangerous breeds.&nbsp;As of December 3, 2014, the estimated number of U.S. organizations with breed-specific laws were as follows: Cities: 860; Counties: 26; States: 37; Military Bases: 292. (See www.dogsbite.org.)&nbsp; Liability for Injuries The owner of any dog is liable for the damages suffered by any person who is bitten by the dog while in a public place or lawfully in a private place, including the property of the owner of the dog,&nbsp;regardless of the former viciousness of the dog or the owner&#39;s knowledge of such viciousness. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 3342 )&nbsp;In addition to actions against owners for violating CC&amp;Rs and Rules, owners can be sued for violating&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 3342.5 &nbsp;and local ordinances. Without knowledge of a dog&#39;s&nbsp;dangerous propensities, an association is not liable for the injuries inflicted by the dog. ( Chee v. Amanda Goldt Property Management ) &nbsp;However, once a board is on notice that a dog is dangerous, it must take action to protect the membership from the dog or face potential liability for negligence and breach of fiduciary duties. In March 2002, a jury convicted Marjorie Knoller of second-degree murder because her dog mauled to death her neighbor, 33-year-old Diane Whipple, a college lacrosse coach. Whipple was bitten an estimated 77 times and had her neck torn apart. Marjorie Knoller and her husband were also found guilty of involuntary manslaughter and owning a &quot;mischievous&quot; animal, for which they were sentenced to 4 years in jail. The Knollers were fully aware of the aggressive tendencies of their dogs. Prohibiting Aggressive Breeds Condominium associations are vulnerable to aggressive dogs because indoor common hallways and elevators bring owners into close contact with dogs. Some associations have banned particular breeds of dogs altogether. This can be done through the adoption of a rule or by amending the CC&amp;Rs. Muzzling Dogs .&nbsp;If, after a hearing with the owner of a dog, the board makes a&nbsp;good faith determination&nbsp;that a dog has a propensity to nip at or bite people or other animals, the board can require that the dog be muzzled whenever the dog is on or passing through the common areas.&nbsp;If the owner refuses to muzzle his dog, the association can go to court for an order that the dog be permanently removed from the property. Other Actions . &nbsp;Other actions that can be taken include limiting the size of dogs (the most common&nbsp;limitation is by weight,&nbsp;with the following maximum weights being used most frequently by condominium associations: 15, 20, 25, 30, 35, 40, or 45 pounds). Dog Leashes and Tethers Enforcing Leash Requirements . The board has a duty to either reasonably enforce the existing leash requirements in their CC&amp;Rs or rules. If the CC&amp;Rs are not enforced and someone is injured by a loose dog, the association (and the board) would likely be sued. It might be that voice commands and electronic leashes are effective alternatives to traditional leashes. However, this is a matter that should be debated and voted on by the membership. If the leash requirement is in the Rules rather than the CC&amp;Rs, the board should send a proposed rule change to the membership and&nbsp;allow feedback&nbsp;before changing the rule. Lease Ordinances. &nbsp;Associations are required to enforce their own restrictions, not city or county ordinances. Boards enforce HOA rules and cities enforce their own ordinances. Unless the ordinance states otherwise, an association is not obligated, nor is it authorized to be the enforcement arm of the city. If an owner violates the city&rsquo;s leash ordinance, someone notifies the city, and the city orders the person to cease violating its ordinance. If, however, the association&rsquo;s CC&amp;Rs have a provision that any violation of a local ordinance is deemed a violation of the nuisance provision of the CC&amp;Rs, then the association can fine the person, but it does so as a violation of the CC&amp;Rs, not as a violation of the ordinance. Tethering Dogs . &nbsp;&nbsp;Irresponsible pet owners triggered the passage of a law in 2006 regarding the mistreatment of dogs. The statute, prohibits persons from tethering, fastening, chaining, tying, or restraining a dog to a dog house, tree, fence, or other stationary object for more than three hours in a 24-hour period . ( Health &amp; Safety Code &sect; 122335 )&nbsp;Violations can result in a misdemeanor and fines.&nbsp;Dogs that are tethered for extended periods often create a nuisance by whining and barking, either out of loneliness, boredom, or distress. Moreover, they are prone to injury from choke chains, entanglement in their tethers, and heat stroke.&nbsp; ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login