URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/R/Room-Occupancy-Restrictions

Room & Occupancy Restrictions You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME R Room & Occupancy Restrictions Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings HOA ROOM & OCCUPANCY RESTRICTIONS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Governing Documents Bylaws &amp; Articles CC&amp;Rs CC&amp;Rs Amendments&nbsp; &amp; Restatements Condo Plan Rent Restrictions Short-Term Rentals Room&nbsp;&amp; Occupancy Restrictions Room Rental Business Owners cannot use the broad definition of &quot;family&quot; as an excuse to engage in room rental commercial activity. Colony Hill is a planned development near San Diego where defendant Masood Ghamaty bought a four-bedroom, three-bath house. Ghamaty moved into the house and rented the remaining rooms to six persons at various times for two months up to&nbsp;two years.&nbsp;Owners voiced concerns to the board about parking issues, renters, and a loud party at Ghamaty&#39;s home. They complained&nbsp;that Ghamaty ran a commercial enterprise prohibited by the CC&amp;Rs. The board met with Ghamaty and demanded that he immediately return the property to a private single-family dwelling status. Ghamaty denied that he was violating the CC&amp;Rs because he considered the renters to be his family. The association filed suit. At trial, Ghamaty relied on the San Diego Municipal Code&#39;s definition of &quot;family&quot; as &quot;unrelated persons who jointly occupy and have equal access to all areas of a dwelling unit and who function together as an integrated economic unit.&quot; The court found that &quot;family&quot; could not reasonably be interpreted to include Ghamaty and his renters. Ghamaty provided no evidence he had any prior relationship with five of the renters or that any of the renters had any previous relationship with each other. He produced no evidence that he shared meals with or had any relationship with the renters. Ghamaty argued that the permanent injunction issued by the trial court violated his right to privacy under the California Constitution, i.e., &quot;the &nbsp; State may not utilize its power to interfere with a person&#39;s choice of cohabitants.&quot; The court noted that the Constitution restricts the State, not private developers. Moreover, a prior Supreme Court decision made it clear that CC&amp;Rs can limit activities in the confines of the home itself.&nbsp;The court ruled&nbsp;that Ghamaty was engaged in commercial activity prohibited by the CC&amp;Rs, and the injunction was rationally related to the association&#39;s right to maintain its family character by prohibiting uses other than single-family dwelling purposes. (See&nbsp; Colony Hill v. Ghamaty ) Family Defined . Older documents&nbsp;sometimes have restrictions that limit occupancy to persons related by blood, adoption, or marriage. Such restrictions&nbsp;are no longer enforceable. ( City of Chula Vista v. Pagard &nbsp;(1981) 115 Cal.App.3d 785) Many municipalities broadly define&nbsp;&quot;family&quot; to include unrelated persons. For example, San Diego defines a family as: &quot;Two or more persons related through blood, marriage or legal adoption... or unrelated persons who jointly occupy and have equal access to all areas of a dwelling unit and who function together as an integrated economic unit.&#39; (San Diego Mun. Code, &sect; 113.0103)&nbsp;In addition, a number of California cases have struck down attempts to limit the number of unrelated people from living together as one household. [See&nbsp; City of San a Barbara v. Adamson&nbsp; (1980) 27 Cal.3d 123] If limitations on occupancy are based on the number of occupants rather than the definition of family, they are generally enforceable. [ City of Edmonds v. Oxford House, Inc. &nbsp;(1995) 514 US 725] Recommendation : The January 1, 2021, addition of&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 4741 &nbsp;to the Davis-Stirling Act may have impacted the ruling in this case by contemplating owner-occupied rentals in subsection (e). Boards of direct rs should consult legal counsel when drafting rental and leasing provisions. To amend your CC&amp;Rs,&nbsp; CONTACT US . Occupancy Restrictions Restricting density is important because overcrowding strains an association&#39;s parking, drives up utility costs, overloads recreational facilities, disrupts residents&#39; quiet enjoyment, and depresses property values.&nbsp;An association has the authority to impose&nbsp; reasonable restrictions &nbsp;upon the occupancy of condominium units. ( Ritchey v. Villa Nueva ) Restrictions can be imposed, provided they are not discriminatory. Discrimination . The Federal Fair Housing Act prohibits restrictions on occupancy that discriminate based on race, color, religion, national origin, sex,&nbsp;familial status, or handicap. In particular, occupancy restrictions cannot be an excuse to discriminate against families with children. The Department of Housing and&nbsp;Urban Development (HUD) has stated that, in appropriate circumstances, owners and managers may develop and implement reasonable occupancy requirements based on factors such as the number and size of sleeping areas or bedrooms and the overall size of the dwelling unit. ( Fair Housing Oc upancy Standards ) Two Plus One Formula . While opposed to discrimination, California&#39;s Civil Rights Department has allowed restrictions using a &quot;two-plus-one&quot; formula, i.e., two persons per bedroom plus one additional person for the household. For example, a 1-bedroom unit could have three people, a 2-bedroom could have five persons, and so on.&nbsp; The formula is based on a 1998 adoption of the &quot; Keating Memo &quot; by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. It creates a presumption that 2 + 1 is reasonable but is subject to rebuttal based on factors such as: the size of each bedroom, the size and configuration of the residence, other physical limitations, such as the capacity of the building systems, the age of the children, and state and local laws Other Formulas. &nbsp;The Uniform Housing Code and California&#39;s Health &amp; Safety Code restrict the number of persons in a unit using a formula based on bedroom square footage. In addition, many&nbsp;cities and counties will issue their housing occupancy standards. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can&nbsp; contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the&nbsp; Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login