URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/S/Small-Claims-Court

Small Claims Court Basics You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME S Small Claims Court Basics Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings SMALL CLAIMS COURT Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Legal Issues Security Attorney-Client Privilege Liability Protections Internal Dispute Resolution Alternative Dispute Resolution Harassment Small Claims&nbsp; Court Attorneys&#39; Fees Artificial Intelligence Small Claims Limitations Dollar Limitations . &nbsp;Although owners can sue associations for claims up to $12,500 ( Code Civ. Proc. &sect; 116.221 ), associations are limited to $6,250. ( Code Civ. Proc. &sect; 116.220 )&nbsp;No person may file more than two small claims actions in which the amount demanded exceeds two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500) anywhere in the state in any calendar year. ( Code Civ. Proc. &sect; 116.231(a) ) Attorney Limitations . Attorneys are not permitted to represent parties in small claims court actions. However, attorneys are allowed to advise a party before or after a small claims action commences. Attorneys can also represent parties in a small claims appeal ( Code Civ. Proc. &sect; 116.530 ) Who May Appear . Homeowner associations created to manage a common interest development, as defined in&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 4100 , may appear and participate in a small claims action through an agent, a management company representative, a bookkeeper,&nbsp; or a duly appointed or elected officer or director who appears on behalf of that association. ( Code Civ. Proc. &sect; 116.540(i) ) ADR Is Not Required . Associations and members using small claims court are not required to first offer &nbsp; pre-litigation alternative dispute resolution .&nbsp; Matters That Can Be Heard Delinquent Assessments .&nbsp;Associations are allowed to simultaneously&nbsp; record a lien &nbsp;on a property for delinquent assessments and sue for a money judgment. Once an association obtains a money judgment against a delinquent owner, any existing assessment lien on the property is automatically extinguished and must be replaced with a judgment lien if the association wants to preserve its rights. ( Diamond Heights v. Financial Freedom )&nbsp;Additional limitations on assessment collections apply to foreclosures that do not apply to small claims actions. An association that seeks to collect delinquent...assessments of an amount less than...$1,800...may not collect that debt through judicial or nonjudicial foreclosure&nbsp; but may ...collect...that debt...in small claims court...( Civ. Code &sect; 5720(b) ) In other words, the&nbsp;$1,800 limitation&nbsp;applies to&nbsp; foreclosures ,&nbsp;not small claims actions. The statute clarifies the point by stating, &quot;The amount that may be recovered...for delinquent assessments may not exceed the jurisdictional limits of the small claims court.&quot; ( Civ. Code &sect; 5720(b)(1) )&nbsp;&nbsp;If the association receives a&nbsp;money judgment, the board can levy against the owner&#39;s bank account, sell personal property (vehicles, boats), garnish the owner&#39;s wages, levy any rental income he/she may have, and record a judgment lien against his/her real property. Election Disputes .&nbsp;As provided in&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 5145(c) , owners may bring actions in&nbsp;small claims court&nbsp;for the following under&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 5105(a)&nbsp;and&nbsp; Civil Code&nbsp;&sect; 5120 .&nbsp;In addition to levying fines, small claims judges may grant&nbsp; equitable and injunctive relie f. ( Code Civ. Proc. &sect; 116.220 ) Records Inspection . Members may bring an action in&nbsp;small claims court&nbsp;to enforce their right to inspect and copy the association&#39;s records. If the court finds that the association unreasonably withheld records, the court may assess a penalty of up to $500 for denying each written request and order the production of documents. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5235 )&nbsp;If owners bring an action in small claims that the court finds is&nbsp;frivolous, unreasonable, or without foundation, the court can award costs to the association. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5235 ) Hearing Officers Judge Pro Tem .&nbsp; Small claims courts frequently use&nbsp; pro tem &nbsp;judges to hear cases. &quot;Pro tem&quot; is short for the Latin phrase&nbsp; pro tempore , which means temporary. Accordingly, a &quot;judge pro tem&quot; refers to someone who has been a lawyer for at least 10 years and is trained to hear and decide small claims cases. The person temporarily serves in place of a regular judge. Because of budget constraints and the shortage of judges, small claims courts make extensive use of temporary judges. Commissioner .&nbsp; A small claims commissioner is a step above a&nbsp; pro tem &nbsp;and a step below a judge. Instead of being volunteers who fill in occasionally, commissioners are paid a salary and hired full-time to hear small claims cases.&nbsp;Parties to a small claims action are not required to use commissioners or&nbsp; pro tem &nbsp;judges. If one of the parties does not want a temporary judge, they can ask the court to have a judge hear the case. That may require coming back on another day when a judge is available.&nbsp;As provided for in California Rules of Court, &nbsp;Rule 2.816(d) : A party stipulates to a court-appointed temporary judge by either of the following: (1) The party is deemed to have stipulated to the attorney serving as a temporary judge if the party fails to object to the matter being heard by the temporary judge before the temporary judge begins the proceeding; or (2) The party signs a written stipulation agreeing that the matter may be heard by the temporary judge. Section 259(d) &nbsp;of the Code of Civil Procedure provides that a commissioner can act as a temporary judge upon the stipulation of the parties. Where a party fails or refuses to stipulate, the actions of a commissioner are void. ( Yetenekian v. Superior Court&nbsp; (1983) 140 Cal.App.3d 361.)&nbsp; Section 170.6 &nbsp;of the Code of Civil Procedure allows for&nbsp;replacing any judicial officer (pro tem, commissioner, or appointed judge). Parties must object at their first opportunity in small claims court, or the objection may be deemed waived, i.e., a stipulation may be implied by the parties&rsquo; conduct. ( Foosadas v. Superior Court &nbsp;(2005) 130 Cal.App.4th 649) Errors and Appeals Erroneous Ruling . &nbsp;Even though a losing plaintiff cannot appeal, a party can move to vacate a small claims judgment based on clerical error or an incorrect legal basis. ( Code Civ. Proc. &sect; 116.725 ) See Form SC-108. In addition, Form SC-135 can be used to file a motion to vacate a judgment. You can find the forms on the&nbsp;California Courts website. Appealing a Decision .&nbsp; The plaintiff in a small claims action cannot appeal an adverse ruling. The defendant, however, has the right to appeal if done within 30 days. ( Code Civ. Proc. &sect; 116.710 ) If a small claims decision is appealed, the matter is heard in Superior Court, and an attorney may represent each side. The case is heard&nbsp; de novo , i.e., as if it had not been heard before and as if no decision had been rendered. There is no right of discovery, and the matter cannot be heard without a jury. The decision by the Superior Court judge is final and binding. There is no right of further appeal. OTHER COURTS Superior Court Superior courts have general subject matter jurisdiction and handle both civil and criminal cases. Superior courts are separated into divisions for limited jurisdiction (cases involving claims for less than $35,000) and unlimited jurisdiction (claims for more than $35,000). Superior courts have the power to order&nbsp; injunctive relief . Decisions made in the superior court are not binding on other courts. Parties who lose in superior court may appeal to California&#39;s Court of Appeal. Courts of Appeal The Court of Appeal is divided into&nbsp; six districts . Panels of three justices are selected to review lower court cases. The justices review case files and transcripts to decide if legal errors were made in the case. Decisions made by courts of appeal are binding on all lower courts. Supreme Court &nbsp; California&#39;s Supreme Court is the highest court in the state. Like Courts of Appeal, it does not use juries or take testimony. Instead, seven justices hear appeals to determine if errors were made in a superior court case (once a court of appeal has heard the issue). At least 4 of the seven justices must agree on the final decision. TERMINOLOGY A&nbsp; decree&nbsp; is a judgment by a court of equity, admiralty, divorce, or probate granting relief to a party. A decree is also referred to as a judgment. A&nbsp; judgment&nbsp; is a court&#39;s final determination of the rights and obligations of the parties. An&nbsp; opinion&nbsp; is a court&#39;s statement of relevant facts, applicable points of law, and reasoning that led to the court&#39;s decision. An&nbsp; order &nbsp;is issued by a court requiring a person to do or not do something. A&nbsp; ruling&nbsp; is the outcome of a court&#39;s decision, whether on some particular point of law (such as the admissibility of evidence) or the case as a whole.&nbsp;A ruling may lead to an order. A&nbsp; verdict&nbsp; is delivered by a jury, which decides whether the evidence satisfies the elements of a claim. See:&nbsp; California Courts Website ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login