URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/S/Solar-Energy-Systems

Solar Energy Systems You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME S Solar Energy Systems Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings HOA SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Architectural&nbsp;Committee Architectural&nbsp; Guidelines Minutes&nbsp;&amp; Plans Solar Energy Accessory&nbsp; Dwelling Units Existing&nbsp;Violations View&nbsp;Protection Lot Splits HOAs Cannot Prohibit Solar Systems California promotes the use of solar energy systems. Accordingly, associations cannot (i) prohibit solar energy systems, (ii) impose restrictions that significantly increase their cost, or (iii) impose restrictions that significantly decrease their efficiency. ( Civ. Code &sect; 714 ) Solar Water Heating . For solar water heating systems, associations cannot impose requirements that will increase by an amount exceeding 10 percent (10%) of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) , or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding 10 percent (10%), as originally specified and proposed. ( Civ. Code &sect; 714(d)(1)(A) ) Solar Energy Systems . For solar energy systems, associations cannot impose requirements that will decrease efficiency by more than 10% or increase system costs by more than $1,000 from those as originally specified and proposed. ( Civ. Code &sect; 714(d)(1)(B) ) As provided for in Civil Code &sect; 714.1 , associations may impose reasonable provisions that restrict the installation of solar energy systems in common areas. &quot;Reasonable restrictions&quot; include those which allow for an alternative system of comparable cost and efficiency.&quot;&nbsp;( Palos Verdes v. Rodman ) Exclusive Use Roofs . Townhouse owners with exclusive use common area roofs have a better argument that they have the right to install solar panels on their roofs. However, if the association is obligated to maintain those roofs, it raises significant issues related to the increased cost of maintenance and whether those costs can be billed to the owners who install solar panels. HOA Solar Panels . Associations can install solar panels to heat swimming pools and other electrical needs. The cost of installing them can be covered by a special assessment, a loan, solar leases, and power purchase agreements (PPA). Under a Solar Lease or PPA, a third party pays for and owns the solar installation, taking advantage of the tax benefits and selling the electricity generated to the association. The advantages to the association are (a) no or minimal up-front costs, (b) lower energy rates, and (c) certainty about the rates/tariffs the association will be paying for energy for years to come (typically 15-20 years). Common Area Solar Installations Members have the right to install solar energy panels on a common area roof of the building in which the owner resides or a garage or carport adjacent to the building that has been assigned to the owner for exclusive use. Per Civil Code &sect; 714.1 and&nbsp; &sect; 4746 , the following guidelines apply: the system must meet applicable building codes; the system must receive the association&#39;s approval (which cannot be unreasonably withheld); the association may include provisions for the maintenance, repair, or replacement of roofs or other building components; the association may require installers to&nbsp; indemnify the association and pay for any damage; the association may require a site survey showing the placement of the panels and equitable allocation of usable area among owners sharing the same roof, garage, or carport; applicants must notify each owner of a unit in the building on which the installation will be located of the application to install a solar energy system; the owner and each successive owner must maintain a homeowner liability coverage policy at all times and provide the association with the corresponding certificate of insurance within 14 days of approval of the application and annually thereafter; disclose to prospective buyers the existence of the solar energy system and their responsibilities to maintain and pay for any damage to the common areas. Architectural Review Deadline to Approve or Disapprove . If an application is not denied in writing within 45 days from the date of receipt of the application, the application shall be deemed approved unless that delay is the result of a reasonable request for additional information.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 714(e)(2)(B) ) A decision by the association on a proposed change must be in writing. If a proposed change is disapproved, the written decision shall include both an explanation of why the proposed change is disapproved and a description of the procedure for reconsideration of the decision by the board. ( Civ. Code 4765(a)(4) ) Reconsideration . If a proposed change is disapproved, the applicant is entitled to reconsideration by the board, at an open meeting of the board. This paragraph does not require reconsideration of a decision that is made by the board or a body that has the same membership as the board.&nbsp;( Civ. Code 4765(a)(5) ) Penalty for Willfull Delays . If approvals are willfully avoided or delayed, an association can be penalized up to $1,000 . ( Civ. Code &sect; 714(f) ) Attorney&#39;s Fees . The prevailing party in an action to enforce compliance with Civil Code 714 is entitled to an award of attorney&#39;s fees. ( Civ. Code &sect; 714(g) ) Maintenance Covenant . Whenever a solar energy system is installed by an owner on a common area roof (or anywhere in the common areas), a maintenance covenant should be prepared by legal counsel for signature by the owner and recordation with the County Recorder obligating the owner (and all future owners) to properly maintain the system, repair any damage to the common areas related to or arising from the owner&#39;s solar energy system, and indemnifying the association in the event it is sued because of the solar energy system. Aesthetic Considerations .&nbsp;Aesthetics are a proper part of the architectural review process, provided it does not significantly increase the installation cost. A homeowner in the Tesoro del Valle Master Homeowners Association installed solar panels on a slope adjacent to his property without HOA approval. For aesthetic reasons and because of slope structure restrictions, the HOA wanted the panels on the owner&#39;s roof. The owner refused, and the association sued.&nbsp;The homeowner argued that &quot;aesthetic considerations&quot; were improperly part of the review process and violated&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 714 . The court disagreed. It ruled that &quot;an evaluation of a proposed solar energy system--just as any other proposed improvement--would involve consideration of aesthetics.&quot;&nbsp;( Tesoro del Valle v. Griffen ) Cost Considerations . Expert testimony by the association showed that the cost of installing the solar panels on the owner&#39;s roof was actually cheaper than installing them on the slope. Based on the testimony, the court ruled that the HOA&#39;s guidelines were not unduly burdensome and, therefore, reasonable. Redesign . The owner then argued that once the architectural committee disapproved his original application, it had a duty to redesign his solar energy system to meet their guidelines. Again, the court disagreed. The court found that the law imposed no such burden on associations. Per statute, the only obligation of the committee was to inform the owner of the&nbsp;basis for its denial&nbsp;of his application. The court ruled that &quot;the burden is on the homeowner to submit an application that is complete and sufficient to generate [architectural committee] approval.&quot; ( Tesoro del Valle v. Griffen ) Licensed Installer .&nbsp;Contractors installing solar energy systems must hold an A, B, C-10, or C-46 license. Architectural Procedures &amp; Guidelines . For additional information about architectural guidelines, see &quot; Architectural Procedures &amp; Guidelines .&quot; Solar Shade Act The California Solar Shade Control Act ( Public Resources Code &sect; 25980 et seq.) protects solar energy systems from excessive shading. Trees and shrubs planted after a solar collector&#39;s installation cannot cast shadows that cover more than 10% of the collector&#39;s absorption area between 10 a.m. and 2 p.m. ( Pub. Res. Code &sect; 25982 ) Trees and shrubs planted before the solar collector&#39;s installation are exempt from the Act. ( Pub. Res. Code &sect; 25984 ) ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login