URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/S/Stock-Cooperatives

Stock Cooperatives You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME S Stock Cooperatives Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings STOCK COOPERATIVES Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Condos, PDs, Co-ops &amp; TICs Other Ownership Structures Escrows and Lenders Association Defined Common Interest Developments Condominiums Planned Developments Membership Rights Stock Cooperatives Tenancies&nbsp; in Common Davis-Stirling History A stock cooperative is the earliest form of common interest development and is found predominantly on the East Coast of the United States. According to the Housing International Coop, half of all co-ops in the U.S. are in New York City. Even so, California has an estimated 30,000 stock cooperative housing units. ( National Association of Housing Cooperatives ) It is one of the four legal structures recognized by the Davis-Stirling Act. Stock Cooperative Recorded Declarations There is an inconsistency in the Davis-Stirling Act that resulted from unfortunate drafting. Civil Code &sect; 4200 states that a stock cooperative falls under the Act provided all the following are recorded: a declaration and parcel map. Developers rarely record a declaration since they are&nbsp;unnecessary to form a stock cooperative. That would seem to prevent the Act from regulating stock co-ops. However, stock cooperatives are specifically identified as one of the four forms of common interest developments subject to the Davis-Stirling Act. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4100 )&nbsp;A stock cooperative is defined as follows: &ldquo;Stock cooperative&rdquo; means a development in which a corporation is formed or availed of, primarily for the purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for a term of years, improved real property, and all or substantially all of the shareholders of the corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the real property, title to which is held by the corporation. The owners&rsquo; interest in the corporation, whether evidenced by a share of stock, a certificate of membership, or otherwise, shall be deemed to be an interest in a common interest development and a real estate development for purposes of subdivision (f) of Section 25100 of the Corporations Code.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 4190(a) ) Stock Certificates An owner&#39;s interest in the corporation is evidenced by shares of stock or&nbsp;a certificate of membership. If the person borrows money from a bank to purchase the shares of stock, the shares are normally held by the bank as collateral for the loan.&nbsp; Bylaws &amp; Proprietary Lease&nbsp; Bylaws . As with all corporations, stock co-ops have bylaws , which describe how the corporation is governed, the number of directors, their term of office, etc. Co-op bylaws sometimes contain house rules, but most are&nbsp;found in the proprietary lease. Proprietary Lease&nbsp;- Occupancy Agreement . Once a person purchases stock and becomes an owner, they have the right to occupy an &quot;apartment&quot; owned by the corporation. This is accomplished using a proprietary lease, sometimes called an occupancy agreement. A proprietary lease differs from a regular lease because it is specific to co-ops. Unlike a regular lease, which gives a tenant the right to occupy a residence for a specified period, a proprietary lease gives a tenant the right to occupy a unit for as long as they own shares in the corporation. A proprietary lease contains &quot;house rules&quot; and the person&#39;s obligation to pay &quot;rent&quot; to the corporation, also referred to as &quot;dues&quot; or &quot;maintenance charges.&quot; The lease will contain the following: Who may occupy the unit; Whether or not the unit can be sublet; Who is responsible for what types of repairs; How the shareholder may sell their shares; What constitutes a default on the lease; and Terms and conditions for the co-op to terminate the lease. Distinctive Features of Stock Cooperatives Unlike condominium developments &nbsp;where units are individually owned, a stock cooperative&#39;s apartments are owned by a corporation. Because the arrangement is more akin to a landlord-tenant situation, the corporation&#39;s board of directors can screen buyers to determine if they are financially stable enough to buy into the development. &nbsp; CONDOMINIUMS STOCK COOPERATIVES Units Members purchase units. The corporation owns units, tenants purchase shares of stock in the corporation, and lease units under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement. Common Area Members own an undivided fractional interest in common areas. The corporation owns common areas. Maintenance Association maintains common areas via assessments levied on owners. The corporation maintains common areas via carrying charges, also called maintenance fees. Governance Board of directors elected by the membership. Board of directors elected by shareholders. Transferability Condominiums are easily transferable, and financing is readily available. The transfer of apartments can be significantly restricted, and financing is more difficult since loans are secured by shares of stock, which are considered personal property. Discretionary Approvals . Another distinctive feature of stock coops is the board&#39;s ability to reject the purchaser of a unit. Because a buyer is actually purchasing shares of stock in the corporation instead of a unit, the board can reject a purchaser for financial reasons. As long as the reason for declining a buyer is not discriminatory based on a protected class under state and federal fair housing laws, the purchase can be denied. While there is case law on the East Coast addressing this issue, there is nothing in the Davis-Stirling Act or California case law covering the practice.&nbsp; Other Cooperative Arrangements &nbsp; Limited Equity Co-Ops . &nbsp;LECs are intended for low- and moderate-income families. Limited-equity cooperatives typically have 30- to 40-year low-interest mortgages from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) with price restrictions imposed by HUD. As such, HUD properties pay below-market-rate property taxes based on the co-op&rsquo;s operating expenses rather than the market-rate value of the property. Market Rate Co-Ops . Directed toward middle- to high-income households. Shares of stock are sold at market value. Voting is often based on the number of shares held. Mobilehome Park Cooperatives .&nbsp; The Mobilehome Resid ency Law regulates mobilehome parks that are cooperatives . (&ldquo;MRL&rdquo;) The MRL regulates parks and provides more protections to residents. ( Civ. Code &sect; 799.1 ) California Law Revision Commission . In a January 23, 2020, Staff Memorandum, the California Law Revision Commission published the following background information about stock cooperatives: A stock cooperative is a real property development in which title to the development is held by a corporation. Ownership of a share of that corporation entitles the shareholder to exclusively occupy a unit within the development. The purchase of a share is generally implemented through a sales contract, with ownership evidenced by a memorandum of lease or membership document. There are estimated to be around 30,000 stock cooperative housing units in California. The two primary types of stock cooperatives are the &ldquo;market rate&rdquo; cooperative, in which a share is bought and sold for market price, and the limited equity housing cooperative (LEHC), in which the sales price of the share is artificially restricted to provide long-term affordable housing. LEHCs are typically income-restricted, and many stock cooperatives are age-restricted. In a stock cooperative, the ability to transfer a share can be significantly restricted. Stock Cooperative Collection Actions Assessment collection in stock cooperatives is a little confusing because members own shares of stock rather than title to a particular unit. The Davis-Stirling Act provides for the collection of delinquent assessments from the owners of separate interests, which includes shareholders in cooperatives.&nbsp;The delinquent assessments of shareholders apply to their units (separate interests). As such, a lien can be filed against their unit and foreclosed if assessments remain unpaid. The unit&#39;s legal description should include the entire property&#39;s legal description plus a reference to the shareholder&rsquo;s share certificate, occupancy agreement, proprietary lease, or any other document giving the owner exclusive use of a particular unit. And to the extent that any interest in the unit is evidenced by personal property, i.e., shares of stock, such property will be included in the foreclosure sale. Additional Information :&nbsp;&nbsp; California Center for Cooperative Development &nbsp;(website) ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login