URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/S/Buyer-Responsible-for-Violations

Buyer Responsible for Violations You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME S Buyer Responsible for Violations Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings BUYER RESPONSIBLE FOR VIOLATIONS NOT DEBTS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Architectural&nbsp;Committee Architectural&nbsp; Guidelines Minutes&nbsp;&amp; Plans Solar Energy Accessory&nbsp; Dwelling Units Existing&nbsp;Violations View&nbsp;Protection Lot Splits QUESTION : Is the buyer of a unit responsible for architectural violations in that unit? After a new owner moved into a unit, the downstairs owner started complaining about noise from the unit. The prior owner was a single woman. The new owner is a couple with two young children. We investigated and found the previous owner had installed hardwood floors violating our CC&amp;Rs. Can we force the new owner to remove the floors and reinstall the carpet? ANSWER : If the installation was unauthorized, the association&nbsp;could require the new owner to remove the hardwood floors and install carpet. The buyer would have recourse against the seller for not disclosing the CC&amp;R violation. Sellers are obligated by the Davis-Stirling Act to provide prospective buyers with a &quot;summary of any notice previously sent to the owner under&nbsp; Section 5855 that sets forth any alleged violation of the governing documents that remains unresolved at the time of the request.&quot; ( Civ. Code &sect; 4525(a)(5) ) Even if the association had given no prior notice, the buyer remains liable for the violation since the association is not required to inspect an owner&rsquo;s separate interest before the sale. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4525(a)(5) ) Architectural Violation Is Not A Prior Debt The buyer might argue that he is not responsible for a breach of covenant per Civil Code &sect; 1466 , which states: &quot;No one, merely because of having acquired an estate subject to a covenant running with the land, is liable for a breach of the covenant before he acquired the estate, or after he has parted with it or ceased to enjoy its benefits.&quot; The courts have interpreted the statute to apply to the prior owner&#39;s debts, i.e., delinquent assessment, fees, and fines of the seller, since those are personal obligations of the owner: The apparent purpose of section 1466 is one of fairness to a party who acquires property. Since such a party has no connection with the property until he comes into possession, the Legislature has provided that the party should not be liable for the debts of its predecessors in interest. ...essential fairness dictates that respondent should not be held liable for unpaid assessments for which it will receive nothing in return. ...Thus, it is our conclusion that section 1466 protects respondent from liability for the unpaid assessments of its predecessors in interest ( Mountain Home Properties v. Pine Mountain Lake Ass&#39;n &nbsp;(1982) 135 Cal.App.3d 959) No Waiver of Association&#39;s Rights Civil Code &sect; 4525(a)(5) makes it clear that Civil Code &sect; 1466 doesn&rsquo;t abrogate the association&rsquo;s right to enforce violations of the governing documents against the new owner: A copy or a summary of any notice previously sent to the owner pursuant to Section 5855 that sets forth any alleged violation of the governing documents that remains unresolved at the time of the request. The notice shall not be deemed a waiver of the association&rsquo;s right to enforce the governing documents against the owner or the prospective purchaser of the separate interest concerning any violation. This paragraph shall not be construed to require an association to inspect an owner&rsquo;s separate interest. This provision does more than offset the voiding of the recorded &ldquo;notice of non-compliance&rdquo; addressed in Ward v. Superior Court (1997) 55 Cal.App.4th 60 (as footnote one says, &ldquo;The issue here is not whether CC&amp;Rs can be enforced. It is whether a notice of violation of CC&amp;Rs is a type of document which can be recorded in the public land title records.&rdquo; Civil Code &sect; 4525(a)(5) discusses the right to enforce the governing documents against t he prospective purchaser. Violations Follow the Land An architectural violation&nbsp;follows the land. The buyer of the unit receives all the amenities that go with the property and all the liabilities (architectural violations, not fines or delinquent assessments). Obligations transfer from the seller to the buyer. ( Civ. Code &sect; 1468 ) The violation continues from the seller to the buyer. Owners cannot nullify a continuing violation of the CC&amp;Rs by selling their property before correcting it.&nbsp;Accordingly, new owners must comply with the governing documents by correcting the violation. If the seller fails to disclose the violation to the buyer, the new owner may have a cause of action against the seller for the cost to correct the violation. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login