URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/S/Spouses-Realtors-Lawyers-on-Boards

Spouses, Realtors & Lawyers on Boards You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME S Spouses, Realtors & Lawyers on Boards Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings SPOUSES, REALTORS &amp; LAWYERS ON BOARDS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Spouses &amp; Co-Owners on Boards There is nothing in the law prohibiting a husband and wife from serving on the board. If an association&#39;s bylaws are silent regarding director qualifications, then spouses can serve together on the board.&nbsp;Small associations, in particular, have difficulty persuading people to serve on the board. It is not uncommon in small self-managed associations for a retired couple to be on the board.&nbsp;Joint owners on boards, whether partners who own a unit or husband/wife ownership, create a potential conflict because the joint owners may act as a voting block on all issues rather than acting independently. There is nothing illegal with joint owners on boards. Even so, many associations are uncomfortable with the arrangement and&nbsp;amend their bylaws&nbsp;or election rules&nbsp;to prevent this from occurring.&nbsp;The Davis-Stirling Act allows associations to adopt a restriction prohibiting a member from serving on the board at the same time as another person who holds a n ownership interest &nbsp; in the same unit or lot. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5105(c)(2) .) One Vote Rule . If an association allows co-owners to serve on the board, the &quot;one vote per household&quot; restriction found in governing documents does not apply to directors elected to boards. Even though co-owners have only one vote between them when it comes to matters placed before the membership for a vote, each has a vote when it comes to matters voted on by the board. Realtors on Boards QUESTION : Can associations restrict Realtors from serving on the board? We had a board president who was a real estate agent who fought to keep dues low so sales would be easier. As a result, the HOA was underfunded for the four years he was president, and subsequent boards were forced to make major dues increases to catch up. ANSWER : No, you cannot prohibit Realtors from serving on HOA boards. A &quot; Realtor &quot; on the board does not automatically create a conflict of interest. Real estate professionals can offer great insight into many aspects of the development. Potential&nbsp; conflicts of interest &nbsp;emerge when a real estate agent serves on the board and&nbsp;actively lists and sells property in the&nbsp;association. Some Realtors are careful to avoid conflicts and make excellent board members. Others are not so careful and the following conflicts sometimes emerge: 1.&nbsp;&nbsp; Aesthetics Over Maintenance . Some (not all) will exert pressure to shift limited funds away from needed repairs to discretionary cosmetics. For example, they might push the board to plant flowers and paint buildings when money should be spent on plumbing repairs and a new roof. Low dues and pretty flowers make it easier for Realtor/directors to sell units and earn commissions. This is in the director&#39;s best interest but not the association&#39;s best interest. 2.&nbsp;&nbsp; Exclusivity . A less scrupulous Realtor/director may pressure management and staff to make themselves the exclusive Realtor in the development. They may their business cards on bulletin boards and at security stations to the exclusion of others. Or, they may expect Staff members to recommend the Realtor/director to anyone looking to list or buy in the development. This is contrary to the best interest of members who should have the freedom to engage Realtors of their own choosing and benefit from open competition. 3.&nbsp; Confidential Information . Board members are privy to a great deal of confidential and&nbsp; attorney-client privileged &nbsp;information through their executive session meetings, such as potential litigation, deferred maintenance, construction defects, delinquencies, etc. As real estate agents, they are required by law to disclose anything of significance that may impact the value or desirability of a property. This creates a breach of their&nbsp; fiduciary duties &nbsp;if they disclose confidential information and a breach of their Realtor statutory duties if they don&#39;t. Recommendation . &nbsp;So,&nbsp;to avoid potential conflicts of interest, associations should consider adopting an ethics policy. Lawyers on Boards &nbsp; QUESTION : Is there a conflict of interest when one board member is a practicing attorney &amp; makes pronouncements on all issues that come before the board? He often twists the law to suit his own personal wishes, and intimidates the other two members who are not lawyers. ANSWER : There is no conflict of interest unless the lawyer or his/her firm has been hired by the association. If that happens, the lawyer should step off the board so as to avoid any conflicts of interest. If he/she refuses, the board should immediately get new legal counsel. When it comes to lawyers on boards, there are three types: Good Lawyers .&nbsp; A lawyer on an HOA board of directors can be a valuable asset to an association. Legal training brings unique analytical skills to problems faced by boards and a good lawyer can be invaluable at spotting potential liability issues. Problem Lawyers . &nbsp;Where lawyers on boards get themselves and everyone else into trouble is when they freely offer legal advice. The problem is that they often have no experience with community association law. They mean well but their advice is sometimes dead wrong. Associations should hire good corporate counsel and follow their advice. Seasoned lawyers on boards understand the need to defer to corporate counsel. Nightmare Lawyers . &nbsp;The nightmare lawyers are the ones with the giant egos--the bullies. They constantly remind everyone that they are the smartest person in the room, and they regularly threaten and intimidate fellow directors to get their way. They are an embarrassment to the profession. The membership should replace them as quickly as possible--either through a recall petition or by electing someone else to the seat at the next annual meeting. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with issues affecting community associations, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login