URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/S/Smoking-Growing-Marijuana

Smoking & Growing Marijuana You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME S Smoking & Growing Marijuana Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings SMOKING & GROWING MARIJUANA IN HOAs Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Rules &amp; Regulations Renters Pets Daycare, Drones, Flags Vehicles Clubhouse, Gym, Pool Nuisance Issues Clotheslines, Gardens, Turf &nbsp; Nuisance Defined Nuisance Noise Secondhand Smoke Marijuana Smoking Marijuana Indoors Prohibit&nbsp;Pot Smoking . Associations are allowed to adopt complete prohibitions on smoking, including inside units. It can be done by (i) adopting a rule relying on existing nuisance provisions in your CC&amp;Rs or (ii) amending CC&amp;Rs to expressly prohibit smoking of any kind. The right of associations to prohibit smoking is well established. Secondhand cigarette and marijuana smoke are both on California&#39;s Proposition 65 list of carcinogens (cancer-causing substances). As such, the smoking of either product is a health hazard and constitutes a nuisance. The definition of nuisance includes &ldquo;[a]nything which is injurious to health&hellip;.&rdquo; ( Civ. Code &sect; 3479 )&nbsp; H&amp;S Code &sect; 11362.3 &nbsp;specifically states that the statute cannot be construed to permit any person to smoke cannabis in a location where smoking tobacco is prohibited. Therefore, if an association prohibits smoking, marijuana is included. A prescription for&nbsp;medical marijuana&nbsp;does not override a smoking ban. Federal Restrictions . In 2011, HUD concluded that new admissions of medical marijuana users in public housing must be prohibited and that state laws allowing medical marijuana directly conflict with and are preempted by federal law. Residents using marijuana in states that allow it for medical use are subject to the local Public Housing Agencies, which may decide to continue to assist, deny assistance, or terminate medical marijuana users and others on the property. The January 2015 HUD Housing and FHA Monthly Review , at the bottom of page two, references a memo issued by the Office of Multifamily Housing regarding medical marijuana in HUD multifamily and senior housing communities. It reiterated the rights of HUD property owners to establish their own policies for existing users and the requirement to deny admission to federal housing to any household members using a federally controlled substance, such as marijuana. State Carcinogen Restrictions . In 2009, California added marijuana smoke to its&nbsp; Prop 65 carcinogen list .&nbsp;Marijuana smoke and tobacco smoke share many characteristics about chemical composition and toxicological properties. At least 33 individual constituents present in both marijuana smoke and tobacco smoke are already listed as carcinogens under Proposition 65. See &quot; Evidence on the Carcinogenicity of Marijuana Smoke .&quot;&nbsp;Thus, wherever cigarette smoking is banned, so is marijuana. Because secondhand smoke has been declared a human carcinogen, courts are increasingly protecting the rights of nonsmokers to be free from exposure to it. A judge in Washington D.C. issued a temporary restraining order against a pot smoker when neighbors sued, alleging negligence, nuisance, and trespass from secondhand smoke. A California jury awarded damages against an HOA for not resolving a secondhand smoke dispute. State Smoking Restrictions . Medical marijuana users cannot smoke in a courtroom or inside any governmental buildings (Gov. Code &sect; 7597), or within 20 feet of a main exit, entrance, or operable window of any public buildings (Gov. Code &sect; 7597), or in any workplace ( Labor Code &sect; 6404.5 ), or on school grounds, or while operating a vehicle (H&amp;S &sect; 11362.79). If the State can impose restrictions, associations can also impose reasonable restrictions on the use of medical marijuana. Right to Quiet Enjoyment . HOA members have a right to the quiet enjoyment of their units and should not have to endure the problems associated with secondhand smoke wafting into them. Marijuana smoke carries the drug THC, which has numerous side-effects such as a decrease in short-term memory, dry mouth, impaired motor skills, reddening of the eyes, and feelings of paranoia or anxiety. It also poses a threat to those in jobs that require regular drug testing or those who are seeking jobs where pre-employment drug testing is used. In both cases, THC will show up in their system even though it was acquired by contact with secondhand smoke. Failure of the Board to address the problem could result in legal action and a judgment against the association. ( Chauncy v. Bella Palermo Homeowners Assn . (2013) Orange County Sup. Ct., Case No. 30-2044-00461681; Birke v. Oakwood Worldwide (2009) 169 Cal.App.4th 1540) HOA Nuisance Restrictions . Based on the nuisance provisions in CC&amp;Rs, secondhand smoke, whether cigarette, cigar, marijuana, or otherwise, that drifts into the windows of other units, balconies, or common areas can be restricted. If the user cannot confine the smoke to his unit, the smoke becomes a nuisance that must be abated. The smoker can be required to take appropriate measures to cease his violation of the CC&amp;Rs. The smoker may need to run HEPA filters inside his unit, seal all penetrations in walls, ceilings, and floors, and install weather stripping and door sweeps on doors to stop smoke from migrating into the common areas and surrounding units. Alternatives to Smoking . When it comes to &quot;reasonable accommodation&quot; so pot smokers can get their medicine, associations are not required to accommodate a request for smoking if it endangers the health and quiet enjoyment of their neighbors, especially since alternatives are available. There are ways other than smoking to take the medication. It can be ingested as brownies, candies, or other edible forms. For those who cannot eat because of nausea associated with chemotherapy, patients can use e-cigarettes to inhale THC without producing secondhand smoke odors. City Marijuana Prohibitions Different cities have their own regulations and prohibitions when it comes to smoking marijuana. For examples, in San Francisco , smoking, eating, vaping or use of cannabis is NOT permitted in public places (parks or sidewalks), near schools or anywhere near children, inside most buildings (workplaces, restaurants, bars, entertainment venues) and common areas of multi-unit housing. Generally, use of cannabis is prohibited in places where smoking tobacco is prohibited.&nbsp; www.sf.gov/information/know-your-rights-cannabis-consumer In San Diego , persons under 21 cannot legally posses marijuana. Marijuana cannot be consumed in public or in any location where smoking tobacco is prohibited. Smoking marijuana is not allowed withing 1,000 feet of a school, day care center , or you center, nor is it allowed while driving or while riding in the passenger seat of&nbsp; moter vehicle.&nbsp; www.sandiego.gov/sites/default/files/pd-prop64.pdf The City of Huntington Beach prohibits smoking cannabis in any public place and where smoking tobacco is prohibited. Renters can be prohibited from consuming cannabis in thier units if prohibited by their lease agreement.&nbsp; https://cms3.revize.com/revize/huntingtonbeachca/Documents/Business/Cannabis/Cannabis-FAQ-Fact-Sheet.pdf Recommendation : Boards should review logal ordinances when fashioning their own rules regarding the smoking of cannabis.&nbsp; Growing Marijuana in HOAs QUESTION : The board passed a rule banning marijuana in garden plots. Is the board&#39;s action legal? &nbsp; ANSWER : Yes, it&#39;s legal. Qualified persons are allowed to cultivate marijuana (H&amp;S &sect; 11362.775) but may not keep more than six mature or twelve immature plants ( H&amp;S &sect; 11362.77(a) ). However, just because California does not prosecute citizens for growing a federally banned substance does not mean your association must allow it. Conflicting Laws . The Controlled Substances Act makes it unlawful to manufacture, distribute, dispense, or possess any controlled substance. 21 U.S.C. 801. The federal government does not recognize any acceptable medical use for marijuana. (21 U.S.C. 812(b)(1).) California, on the other hand, legalized marijuana for medical purposes. (H&amp;S Code &sect;11362.5&nbsp; et seq .) With one exception, qualified patients may possess no more than eight ounces of dried marijuana.&nbsp; (H&amp;S Code &sect; 11362.77(a) ) Medical Marijuana . What if the person has a prescription (also known as a &ldquo;card&rdquo; or &ldquo;license&rdquo;) for medical marijuana? Although federal law does not recognize a distinction between medical and recreational use of marijuana, California does. In 1996, marijuana was legalized for limited medical use. Under California&rsquo;s&nbsp; Health &amp; Safety Code&nbsp;&sect;&nbsp;11362.77 , qualified patients are allowed to cultivate up to 6 mature or 12 immature marijuana plants. If an HOA resident has a prescription to grow pot, the state will not prosecute, provided the grower stays within proscribed limits. Recreational Marijuana . In&nbsp;2016, Proposition 64 was passed and chaptered in the Health &amp; Safety Code, effective in 2017.&nbsp; Health &amp; Safety Code &sect;11357 &nbsp;decriminalized the possession of not more than 28.5 grams of cannabis, or not more than eight grams of concentrated cannabis, by a person at least 21 years of age.&nbsp; Health &amp; Safety Code &sect;11358 &nbsp;decriminalizes the planting, cultivating, harvesting, drying, or processing of no more than six living cannabis plants by a person at least 21 years of age, with certain exceptions. None of these changes in the law prohibit Associations from imposing stricter restrictions, including banning cannabis from personal gardens. Garden Plots . The January 1, 2015, change in the Davis-Stirling Act that allows garden plots in backyards&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 4750 ) does not allow for the growing of marijuana. The Civil Code defines &ldquo;Plant crop&rdquo; to mean&nbsp;plants that bear edible &quot;fruits or vegetables.&quot;&nbsp;Although marijuana can be eaten,&nbsp;it&#39;s not a fruit or vegetable. Moreover, the statute specifically excludes &quot;marijuana or any unlawful crops or substances&quot; from the definition of &quot;plant crops.&quot; ( Civ. Code &sect; 1940.10(a)(3) ) Nuisance . &nbsp;Virtually all CC&amp;Rs have a provision against creating a nuisance . Regardless of the legality of the marijuana plants under state law, their presence may still be deemed a nuisance. Marijuana plants have a strong odor that some find extremely unpleasant, and several plants grouped together can produce an overwhelming odor for neighbors or passers-by. Other concerns include: Security . The plants could attract criminal activity. Safety . The heat lamps and other materials to grow plants inside a unit could be a fire hazard. Business . If the person raises&nbsp;the plants for resale for &quot;medical purposes,&quot; they are running a business out of their unit. Insurance . Will the safety/security/business issues create problems with the association&#39;s insurance if the board does nothing to address the problem? Litigation . Litigation may ensue if the board does not abate the nuisance. Recommendation . &nbsp;Boards must make a&nbsp; business decision &nbsp;regarding enforcement. Just because an association can go after a pot grower does not mean it should. Directors must first decide if the plants represent a&nbsp; nuisance , i.e., (i) Is there any criminal activity associated with the plants? (ii) Is the odor strong enough to affect anyone? (iii) Do the plants represent a visual blight? (iv) To what degree do the plants impact members? Additional Information .&nbsp; S econdhand &nbsp;Cigarette Smoke ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login