URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/S/Special-Emergency-Reimbursement-Assessments

Special, Emergency, Reimbursement Assessments You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME S Special, Emergency, Reimbursement Assessments Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings SPECIAL, EMERGENCY & REIMBURSEMENT ASSESSMENTS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Annual Budgets Collections Audits &amp; Reviews Bank Accounts &amp; Loans Reserves Taxes Annual&nbsp;Budget Dues Special &amp; Emergency Assessments Cost Centers Fee Limitations Disclosures Duty to Levy Assessments . Boards must impose regular and special assessments sufficient to carry out their responsibilities under the governing documents. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5600(a) ;&nbsp; Park Place v. Naber &nbsp;(1994) 29 Cal.App.4th 427) Their primary duties are to (i) maintain the common areas , (ii) fund the reserves for maintaining the common areas, (iii) purchase insurance (per statute and the CC&amp;Rs), and (iv)&nbsp; enforce the governing documents . Board Approved Special Assessments 5% Limitation on Boards . By statute, HOA boards of directors are allowed to special assess the membership up to 5% of the current fiscal year&#39;s budgeted gross expenses without membership approval, regardless of any limitations that might be found in the governing documents. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5605(b) )&nbsp;&quot; Budgeted gross expenses &quot; means all expenses in an association&#39;s budget, both operational expenses and reserve contributions. The statute could have said budgeted&nbsp; operating &nbsp;expenses, which would exclude reserves, but it didn&#39;t. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5605(b )) Therefore, reserve allocations are included in the 5% calculation for board-approved special assessments. How to Calculate 5% . If an association&#39;s annual budget is $100,000, the maximum special assessment the board can impose without membership approval is $5,000. That does not mean $5,000 per unit. The $5,000 assessment is divided among all units according to the allocation schedule contained in the CC&amp;Rs. Once the board approves an assessment, proper notice must be given to the membership before collecting it. Assessment Frequency .&nbsp;There is no limit on the number of special assessments, only on the total percentage. For example, the board may levy five 1% special assessments in a single year or one special assessment of 5%. Once the board hits an aggregate of 5% of the budgeted gross expenses for that fiscal year, the membership must approve any further special assessments (unless the additional assessments qualify as&nbsp;emergencies). There is no limit on the size or number of special assessments the membership imposes upon itself. Member Approved Special Assessments Secret Ballot . A membership voting on a special assessment must be done by secret ballot using election rules duly adopted by the association. Membership approval is at a special meeting called for that purpose. Approval Defined . For a special assessment, the approval requirement is set by statute rather than the governing documents. Regardless of anything contrary to an association&#39;s governing documents, special assessments are approved by a &quot;majority of a quorum&quot; of the membership . (Civ. Code &sect; 5605(b) ) It is important to know that this term means approval &quot;by an affirmative vote of a majority of the votes represented and voting in a duly held election in which a quorum is represented, which affirmative votes also constitute a majority of the required quorum.&quot;&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 4070 ) Further, a quorum means more than 50% of the owners of an association, regardless of anything to the contrary, in an association&#39;s governing documents.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 5605(d) (3))&nbsp; For example , in an association of 100 members, 51 ballots must be returned to constitute a quorum. Of those, at least 26 must vote for the special assessment. If 60 ballots are cast, at least 31 must vote in the affirmative. And so on. If a ballot contains a mix of valid and invalid votes, the valid votes are counted, and the invalid ones are ignored. ( RONR (12th ed.) 45:36 )&nbsp;Blank ballots are not counted as yes or no votes. For example, when voting on a special assessment, a majority of a quorum must approve the assessment. In an association of 100 members, a quorum is more than 50, i.e., 51. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5605(c) ) A majority of 51 is 26. If 51 ballots are cast, with ten voting&nbsp;for the assessment and the other 41 not marking their ballot as either yes or no, the vote fails. Ten votes in favor are not a majority. The 41 non-votes do not count as yes votes. For more information, see &quot; Approval Requirements .&quot; Super-Majority Requirements Invalid . Governing documents that require a super-majority for assessment approval are invalid, such as approval by a majority of the membership or approval by a majority of a quorum where the quorum is 2/3 of the membership. The Davis-Stirling Act supersedes such provisions. Notice Requirement . &nbsp;Once an assessment has been approved, proper notice&nbsp;of the increased assessment must be given to the membership as described in Section 4040 , not less than 30 nor more than 60 days before the assessment is due. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5615 ) Expenditure Limitations . For example, if the membership approves a special assessment of $100,000 for two items, roof and boiler repairs, the board cannot use the funds to asphalt the parking lot.&nbsp;They must use the funds for the roof and boiler. The limitation also applies to leftover funds.&nbsp;If, after the work, $8,000 is left over, the board cannot use the surplus funds for new artwork in the lobby. The board must either (i) transfer the funds to reserves for future roof and boiler repairs, (ii) obtain membership approval to buy new artwork for the lobby, or (iii) return the money to the membership. Flexibility in Use of Funds .&nbsp; Even though boards cannot divert special assessment monies from one project to another, they can use the funds for related issues. For example, a special assessment approved for replacing drain lines can be expanded by the board to include remediation of mold discovered in the walls once the replacement program has been started. Although mold was not on the ballot, it is sufficiently related to replacing pipes to fall within the board&#39;s discretion when repairs are made. Where a duly constituted community association board, upon reasonable investigation, in good faith and with regard for the best interests of the community association and its members, exercises discretion within the scope of its authority under relevant statutes, covenants, and restrictions to select among means for discharging an obligation to maintain and repair a development&#39;s common areas, courts should defer to the board&#39;s authority and presumed expertise. Thus, we adopt today for California courts a rule of judicial deference to community association board decisionmaking that applies, regardless of an association&#39;s corporate status, when owners in common interest developments seek to litigate ordinary maintenance decisions entrusted to the discretion of their associations&#39; boards of directors. ( Lamden v. La Jolla Shores , (1999) 21 Cal.4th 249) No Time Limit . There is no time limit on the expenditure of special assessment funds. Any delays in using the monies for their intended purpose must be reasonable. Emergency Special Assessments Normally, boards of directors cannot increase regular assessments more than&nbsp;20% above the prior year&#39;s&nbsp;regular assessments or impose&nbsp;special assessments&nbsp;(within a&nbsp; fiscal year ) that exceed 5% of an association&#39;s&nbsp;budgeted gross expenses&nbsp;for that fiscal year without membership approval. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5605(b) )&nbsp;However, the Legislature provided an exception that allows boards, without membership approval, to impose a special assessment of over 5% if there is an &quot;emergency.&quot; Emergency Defined . An emergency situation is defined by the Davis-Stirling Act to mean any of the following circumstances ( Civ. Code &sect; 5610 ): Court Order . An extraordinary expense is required by a court order. [Boards have the authority (and the obligation) to special assess their membership to pay judgments against their associations, which&nbsp;boards must impose the assessment regardless of any opposition by the membership. In the case of &nbsp; O&#39;Toole Co., Inc. v. Kingsbury Court , a 46-unit association voted down an assessment to pay a $200,000 judgment against it. The court ordered the board to levy an emergency assessment to pay the judgment regardless of the membership&#39;s vote to the contrary.] An owner who prevails&nbsp;in litigation against their association is not exempt from a special assessment levied against the membership to pay the judgment. Although there is no statute or case law that would exempt the owner, the parties could agree to it. &nbsp; Hazardous Conditions and Threats to Personal Safety . An extraordinary expense is necessary to repair or maintain the common interest development or any part of it for which the association is responsible, where a threat to personal safety or another hazardous condition or circumstance on the property is discovered. &nbsp; Unforeseen Repairs . An extraordinary expense necessary to repair or maintain the common interest development or any part of it for which the association is responsible that could not have been reasonably foreseen by the board in preparing and distributing the annual budget report under&nbsp; Section 5300 . Before imposing&nbsp;or collecting an emergency assessment, boards&nbsp;are&nbsp;required to&nbsp; pass a resolution &nbsp;containing written findings as to (a) the necessity of the extraordinary expense involved and (b) why the expense was not or could not have been reasonably foreseen in the budgeting process. The&nbsp;resolution&nbsp;must be distributed to the members with the notice of the &quot;emergency situation&quot; assessment as required by&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 5615 . &nbsp; Utility Repairs . If there is an unexpected disruption in utilities for which the association is responsible, the board shall commence the process to make the repairs necessary to restore gas, heat, water, or electrical services within&nbsp;14 days of the interruption of services. If there are insufficient reserve funds available to cover the costs of repairs&nbsp;or replacements, boards may obtain a loan and impose an emergency assessment to allow for the repayment of the loan.&nbsp;&nbsp;However, before obtaining that financing, the board must pass a resolution containing written findings regarding the nature of the association&rsquo;s expenses and how the association&rsquo;s reserves do not cover the necessary costs. The resolution shall be distributed to the members with the notice of the emergency assessment and with notices otherwise required by law or governing documents pursuant to the board&rsquo;s action, if any. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 4775 ) Court Approved Special Assessments Boards are required to fund common area maintenance. If the membership votes down a major unfunded maintenance project, boards should consider petitioning the court to approve the special assessment. Corporations Code &sect; 7515(a) provides: &quot;If, for any reason, it is impractical or unduly difficult for any corporation to call or conduct a meeting of its members, delegates, or directors or otherwise obtain their consent in the manner prescribed by its articles or bylaws or this part, then the superior court of the proper county, upon petition of a director, officer, delegate or member, may order that such a meeting be called or that a written ballot or other form of obtaining the vote of members, delegates or directors be authorized, in such a manner as the court finds fair and equitable under the circumstances.&quot;&nbsp;If a property is in dire need, this would be a minimal-risk approach following a failed assessment vote to get a court to approve a necessary assessment. The assessment could then be used as collateral for a bank loan . This provides immediate funds for critical maintenance. Reimbursement Assessment for Property Damage Civil Code &sect; 5855(a) &nbsp;allows boards to impose a charge to reimburse the association for costs incurred by the association in the repair of damage to common areas&nbsp;caused by a member or the member&#39;s guests or tenants. The charge may become a lien against the member&rsquo;s separate interest enforceable by the sale of the interest under Sections&nbsp; 2924 ,&nbsp; 2924b , and&nbsp; 2924c , provided the authority to impose a lien is set forth in the governing documents.&nbsp; Lien &amp; Foreclose . The Davis-Stirling Act allows associations to record a lien against an owner&#39;s separate interest on unpaid reimbursement assessments, provided the costs incurred were to repair the common areas.&nbsp;A monetary charge imposed by the association to reimburse the association for costs incurred in repairing damage to common areas and facilities caused by a member or the member&rsquo;s guest or tenant may become a lien against the member&rsquo;s separate interest. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5725(a) ) Hearing . Before a reimbursement special assessment is levied against an owner, the owner should receive written&nbsp;notice of a hearing&nbsp;at which the assessment may be levied to allow the owner&nbsp;to present evidence as to why the assessment should not be levied. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5855(a) ) The board should ensure that expenses are clearly documented and that the owner provides the documentation. Collection . If the owner refuses to pay for the damage he/she caused, an association can impose&nbsp; late fees and interest , record a lien against the owner&#39;s unit, and&nbsp; foreclose &nbsp;as they would with any other delinquent assessment. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login