URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/S/Swimming-Pools-Spas

Swimming Pools & Spas You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME S Swimming Pools & Spas Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings SWIMMING POOLS & SPAS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Rules &amp; Regulations Renters Pets Daycare, Drones, Flags Vehicles Clubhouse, Gym, Pool Nuisance Issues Clotheslines, Gardens, Turf &nbsp; Clubhouse Rental Gym Equipment Movies, Music &amp; Internet Playgrounds Pools &amp; Spas Trails Inflatable Bounce House Eliminating Amenities Anti-Entrapment Drains Required Drowning is the second leading killer of children under the age of 14. One cause is the suction of pool/spa drains for circulating and filtering water. The suction is powerful enough to trap a child underwater until he/she drowns. Federal Law . The Virginia Graeme Baker Pool and Spa Safety Act requires the installation of anti-entrapment drain systems in public pools. This includes pools open to members of an organization and their guests, i.e., homeowners associations. The U.S. Consumer Product Safety Commission staff prepared a document that spells out the technical requirements of the Act . State Law. To comply with the Federal Pool and Spa Safety Act, California amended Section 18942 of, and added Sections 116064.1 and 116064.2 to, the Health and Safety Code to require that swimming pools constructed before January 1, 2010, be properly retrofitted with anti-entrapment devices by no later than July 1, 2010. No further retrofitting is required for swimming pools that completed such a retrofit between December 19, 2007, and January 1, 2010, if the retrofit complied with the Virginia Graeme Baker Pool and Spa Safety and if the association files a proper statement of compliance with California&rsquo;s Department of Public Health before September 30, 2010. Pool Covers There are significant benefits to associations that cover their pools at night. The primary benefits of pool covers are that they: save water by reducing the evaporation of water, and reduce energy costs by reducing heat loss by up to 90%. Types of Covers . There are three kinds of pool covers: tracked, anchored, and floating, each with different safety regulations. &quot;Floating covers&quot; seem to cause the most concern. Since they are designed to float on the water, they can collapse under the weight of a child, allowing the child to become trapped under the cover and drown. As a result, pool covers are regulated. Regulations . Orange County, for example, allows floating pool covers under the following conditions: An approved fence or enclosure must segregate the pool from all dwelling units. The pool is supervised by responsible persons who have sole access to the pool area when it is not open for use. The pool area must be locked to prevent pool use when the cover is placed on the pool water. The pool may not be reopened until the responsible person removes the pool cover and properly stores it. When not in use, the pool cover must be rolled up and stored at least four (4) feet from the pool. Associations with pool covers should check the regulations in their counties. Insurance Issues . Insurance carriers are concerned with pool safety, and that includes making sure pool covers are properly installed and regulations followed, pools are fully fenced with self-closing/locking gates, pool rules are in the open, depth markers are clearly marked on the top deck (not on the inside of the pool), a shepherd&rsquo;s hook and other general life safety equipment is readily available and the pool drain has been approved per the Virginia Graeme Baker&nbsp;Pool and Spa Safety Act. Recommendation : Associations&nbsp;that want to install a pool cover should: Contact their insurance broker to make sure there aren&#39;t any policy exclusions related to pool covers; Obtain approval from appropriate regulatory agencies; Follow applicable safety regulations; Hire licensed, experienced pool operators to maintain your pool and equipment; and Have their insurance carrier inspect the pool and then implement any safety recommendations the carrier makes. Pool Fencing and Gates Drowning is the number one cause of accidental death for children under the age of five in California. Even though an association&#39;s pool may have originally been built without fencing, it needs to be installed. Each county may have specific pool fence requirements, but all residential pools must have pool fencing. Fences need to be 5 ft tall with gaps between fence slats of 4&Prime; or less and gaps of 2&Prime; or less under the fence. Gates must be self-closing and self-latching. (See&nbsp; Swimming Pool Safety Act )&nbsp; Recommendation : Associations should have their pools inspected for proper fencing, gates, and signage. All safety requirements must be complied with, and a written record of the inspection should be kept on file. Animals in the Pool Area EXCEPT for service animals , associations can prohibit animals from pool areas. If someone is blind and needs their guide dog to safely maneuver to a lounge chair, the association cannot prohibit the dog.&nbsp;An animal in the water is a different matter. According to the ADA&#39;s website, the ADA does not override public health rules that prohibit dogs in swimming pools. However, service animals must be allowed on the pool deck and in other areas where the public can go.&nbsp;If someone legitimately needs the emotional support of a comfort animal to use the pool, the animal can be brought into the pool area but not the pool itself. Only service animals properly trained to assist a disabled person in swimming can go into the water. Even so, reasonable restrictions may be imposed regarding the protection of pool filters from animal fur and proper sanitation. Alcohol at the Pool QUESTION : We have frequent problems with alcohol at the pool, where people are drinking all day. They are getting drunk and causing problems for staff and guests.&nbsp;Can we search coolers to prevent glass and alcohol from being brought into the pool area? ANSWER : In addition to impaired judgment caused by alcohol consumption, there is the risk of injury from broken glass. If an alcohol-related injury or death occurs in your pool or spa, the association will almost certainly be sued. Even if the association is ultimately found not liable for the injury/death, the claim can drive up insurance rates. Potential Liability . Your board is already on notice of three sources of serious injury: broken glass, altercations, and drownings--all related to alcohol at the pool. If injuries occur and litigation erupts, directors could find themselves in front of a jury answering questions about why they did nothing to protect members from injury or death. Privacy Issues . Inspecting coolers is a reasonable solution.&nbsp;It&#39;s easier to stop alcohol at the gate than to force a combative drunk out of the pool area.&nbsp;Is this an invasion of privacy? Sports stadiums, concert venues, and airports inspect backpacks, coolers, and luggage every day without violating the law. If someone refuses to open a cooler, they can leave it outside the pool gate. Recommendation : If you don&#39;t have rules against alcohol and glass at the pool, you must&nbsp; properly adopt &nbsp;them. If rules are already in place, you don&#39;t need to revise them to include inspection of coolers. Even so, it would be best to give the membership notice that you will inspect coolers. Make sure you explain why--to protect the safety of those using the pool, to avoid costly litigation, and to keep insurance premiums down. Chemical Testing Daily Testing . The California Department of Health has defined HOA pools as &ldquo;public pools.&rdquo; As such, they must meet higher chlorine levels. Associations must keep a test kit at the pool site and test the water daily. Small associations are exempt from the daily testing if they have 24 or fewer separate interests. Written Records . Health regulations now require that various written records be kept onsite and must be preserved for at least two years. They include the following: chemical testing incidents of fecal, vomit, and blood contamination incidents of drownings or near drownings maintenance and repairs manufacturer&rsquo;s instructions for the operation of all mechanical and electrical equipment and water treatment systems Reporting Requirements . Associations must report incidents where two or more pool users or lifeguards have diarrhea within five days of each other. Pool Signs The California Building Code (CBC) requires many signs of many types depending on your facilities. Although some of these requirements mention &ldquo;public pools,&rdquo; for the purpose of these signs, &ldquo;public pools&rdquo; include those located in a &ldquo;condominium, townhouse, homeowner association, club, community building or area.&rdquo; (CBC &sect; 3101B) The sign requirements under the CBC are: General . All signs shall have clearly legible letters or numbers not less than 4 inches (102 mm) high, unless otherwise required in this section, affixed to a wall, pole, gate, or similar permanent structure in a location visible to all pool users. (CBC &sect; 3120B.1) Artificial Respiration and CPR .&nbsp; An illustrated diagram with text at least 1/4 inch (6 mm) high of artificial respiration and CPR procedures shall be posted. (CBC &sect; 3120B.5) Diarrhea . A sign in letters at least 1 inch (25 mm) high and in a language or diagram that is clearly stated shall be posted at the entrance area of a public pool which states that persons having currently active diarrhea or who have had active diarrhea within the previous 14 days shall not be allowed to enter the pool water. (CBC &sect; 3120B.11) Direction of Flow . (CBC &sect; 3120B.17.) The direction of flow for the recirculation equipment shall be labeled clearly with directional symbols such as arrows on all piping in the equipment area. (CBC &sect; 3120B.17.1) Where the recirculation equipment for more than one pool is located on-site, the equipment shall be marked as to which pool the system serves. (CBC &sect; 3120B.17.2) Valves and plumbing lines shall be labeled clearly with the source or destination descriptions. (CBC &sect; 3120B.17.3) Emergency . The emergency telephone number, 911, the number of the nearest emergency services, and the name and street address of the pool facility shall be posted. (CBC &sect; 3120B.6) Emergency Shut-Off . In letters at least one inch (25 mm) high a sign shall be posted at the spa emergency shut off switch stating, &ldquo;EMERGENCY SHUT OFF SWITCH.&rdquo; (CBC &sect; 3120B.8) Exit . Where automatic gaseous chlorine chemical feeders are used, a sign shall be posted at the pool area entrance, which shows an emergency evacuation procedure in diagrammatic form. Designated emergency exits shall be marked &ldquo;EXIT.&rdquo; (CBC &sect; 3120B.14) Gaseous Oxidizer . Where automatic gaseous chlorine chemical feeders are used, a warning sign with the appropriate hazard identification symbol shall be posted on the exterior side of the door entering the chemical feeder room or area. The sign shall state, &ldquo;DANGER: GASEOUS OXIDIZER - (specific chemical name),&rdquo; or as otherwise required by the California Fire Code. (CBC &sect; 3120B.15) Keep Closed . A sign shall be posted on the exterior side of gates and doors leading into the pool enclosure area stating, &ldquo;KEEP CLOSED.&rdquo; (CBC &sect; 3120B.10) Spa Pool . The pool user capacity of a spa pool shall be based on one pool user for every 10 square feet (0.929 m2) of pool water surface area. (CBC &sect; 3120B.2.1) Other Pools . The pool user capacity for all other pools shall be based on one pool user for every 20 square feet (1.858 m2) of pool water surface area. Exception: Pool user capacity requirements do not apply to wading pools or spray grounds. (CBC &sect; 3120B.2.2) No Diving . Signs shall be posted in conspicuous places and shall state, &ldquo;NO DIVING&rdquo; at pools with a maximum water depth of 6 feet or less. (CBC &sect; 3120B.3) No Lifeguard . Where no lifeguard service is provided, a warning sign shall be posted stating, &ldquo;WARNING:NO LIFEGUARD ON DUTY.&rdquo; The sign also shall state in letters at least 1 inch (25 mm) high, &ldquo;Children should not use pool without adult supervision.&rdquo; (CBC &sect; 3120B.4 was amended 1-1-23 to eliminate &quot;Children under the age of 14&quot; and changed the wording from &quot;shall&quot; to &quot;should&quot;) Warning for Spa Pool . A warning sign for spa pools shall be posted stating, &ldquo;CAUTION&rdquo; and shall include the following language in letters at least 1 inch (25 mm) high: Elderly persons, pregnant women, infants and those with health conditions requiring medical care should consult with a physician before entering the spa. Unsupervised use by children under the age of 14 is prohibited. Hot water immersion while under the influence of alcohol, narcotics, drugs or medicines may lead to serious consequences and is not recommended. Do not use it alone. Prolonged exposure may result in hyperthermia, nausea, dizziness, or fainting. (CBC &sect; 3120B.7) No Use After Dark . Where pools were constructed for which lighting was not required, a sign shall be posted at each pool entrance on the outside of the gate(s) stating, &ldquo;NO USE OF POOL ALLOWED AFTER DARK.&rdquo; (CBC &sect;3120B.9) Wave Pools . A sign in letters at least 1 inch (25 mm) high shall be posted that describes the requirements for wave pools as described in Section 115952, Health and Safety Code. (CBC &sect; 3120B.12) Spray Ground . A sign shall be posted at each spray ground and be visible from any part of the spray ground that states, &ldquo;CAUTION: WATER IS RECIRCULATED. DO NOT DRINK.&rdquo; (CBC &sect; 3120B.13) Turn On Before Entering . Where automatic gaseous chemical feeders are used, a sign shall be posted at the switch to the light and ventilation system for the gaseous chemical feeder room stating, &ldquo;TURN ON BEFORE ENTERING,&rdquo; or as otherwise required by the California Fire Code or the California Electrical Code. (CBC &sect; 3120B.16) User Capacity . A sign shall indicate the maximum number of pool users permitted for each pool. (CBC &sect; 3120B.2) Recommendation : Make sure you check with appropriate agencies to ensure you have the most up-to-date signage. Pool Volunteers There is always potential liability whenever volunteers are involved in any HOA activity. If volunteers watch the kids and a child drowns, the lawsuit would say something to the effect that, &ldquo; The association had volunteers watching my children and, but for their negligence, my child would not have drowned .&rdquo; However, forbidding people from volunteering has its own risks. In the event a child drowns, the lawsuit would now read: &ldquo; My child would not have drowned if you had not forbidden people from volunteering to watch him! &ldquo;&nbsp;Lawyers can spin a tragedy any way they want. Since associations cannot entirely insulate themselves from potential litigation, boards must make a business decision as to which course of action produces the least risk. If children are out of control and there is a foreseeable risk of injury, allowing volunteers to monitor the pool may be the better course of action because it lowers the risk level. In addition, there should be signage for &ldquo;No Lifeguard on Duty&rdquo; and notices in newsletters that parents must provide responsible supervision of their children at the swimming pool. Recommendation : Boards should work with the association&#39;s insurance agent and legal counsel regarding this issue. The association is in a much better position to defend itself if it can show that the pool is regularly inspected and maintained, that all safety equipment is in place, that proper signage is posted, and that rules are enforced. If an association opts for volunteers to help in that effort, they should make sure they are covered by the&nbsp; association&rsquo;s insurance . Spas, Hot Tubs, and Jacuzzis Associations may adopt rules prohibiting young children from using the association&#39;s hot tub/spa. Even though discriminatory, there is a valid health reason for the restriction. Per California regulations, a&nbsp;spa&#39;s water temperature may not exceed 104 degrees. A spa&#39;s high temperatures are known to have adverse health effects on infants and toddlers. Danger of Over-Heating .&nbsp;Infants and young children are more susceptible to overheating than adults and should not be exposed to a spa&#39;s high temperatures. Spa manufacturers frequently provide age limit restrictions and temperature ranges in their literature. If boards adopt restrictions per the manufacturer&#39;s guidelines, they can defend against complaints of discrimination. Children Under Five .&nbsp;Generally, children 5 years old and under should not be allowed to use a whirlpool/hot tub/spa, even with adult supervision. Children between the ages of 6 and 12 should always have an adult when using the facilities. Older children using hot tubs should not soak for more&nbsp;than 5 to 10 minutes at a time. Prolonged exposure to hot temperatures can lead to dehydration, dizziness, and nausea. Recommendation : Associations should regularly inspect and maintain their spas using a licensed and insured vendor. They should also verify temperature requirements since statutes change from time to time. Finally, they have their spas inspected for proper&nbsp;safety equipment. Swim Diapers The Center for Disease Control (&quot;CDC&quot;) has adopted a &quot;Vessel Sanitation Program&quot; that strictly prohibits children in diapers or who are not toilet trained from using public swimming pools and whirlpool spas on cruise ships. This is to prevent pool contamination and the spread of gastrointestinal illnesses.&nbsp;The CDC has determined that swim diapers are not effective in preventing contamination. Although swim diapers prevent solid feces from escaping (assuming they are properly fitted and changed often), they cannot prevent leakage of urine or diarrhea, which contain infection-causing germs. Some refer to swim diapers as &quot;fecal tea bags.&quot; See&nbsp; news release &nbsp;by the National Swimming Pool Foundation.&nbsp;For more information about diarrhea and swimming see the information posted on the&nbsp; Centers for Disease Control &nbsp;website. Recommendation . Based on CDC&#39;s rulings, it is our opinion that associations may adopt similar restrictions for their pools and spas. However, boards should be aware that various anti-discrimination laws prohibit discrimination based on age. Accordingly, boards should consult legal counsel to ensure their rules are properly drafted to apply neutrally to all persons who cannot control their bladder or bowels, not just children. Miscellaneous Senior Communities Swimming Pool Discrimination ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . &nbsp; Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login