URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/T/Termite-Treatment

Termite Treatment You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME T Termite Treatment Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings TERMITE & PEST CONTROL Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Maintenance Pest Control Plumbing Balcony Inspections Asbestos &amp; Mold Reserves Termites &amp; Pest Control Bees &amp; Wasps Wild&nbsp;Animals Responsibility and Treatment Decision Responsibility for Damage and Treatment . Unless CC&amp;Rs provide otherwise, the association is responsible for repairing termite damage in all common area structures. In addition, the association is responsible for treating termites and other wood-destroying pests or organisms in the common areas. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4780 ) Pests that might appear in an individual unit would be the responsibility of the unit owner to treat unless the source of the infestation is through the common areas. Because balconies are a common area for the exclusive use of an owner, the structural elements are the association&#39;s duty to maintain, repair, and replace. As such, it would be the association&#39;s responsibility to inspect and treat for termites and repair any damage to the structure caused by the termites. (See Balcony Inspections ) Method of Treatment . &nbsp;The treatment method (tenting versus spot treatment) and the materials used are at the board&#39;s discretion. Where a duly constituted community association board, upon reasonable investigation, in good faith and with regard for the best interests of the community association and its members, exercises discretion within the scope of its authority under relevant statutes, covenants and restrictions to select among means for discharging an obligation to maintain and repair a development&#39;s common areas, courts should defer to the board&#39;s authority and presumed expertise. Thus, we adopt today for California courts a rule of judicial deference to community association board decisionmaking that applies, regardless of an association&#39;s corporate status, when owners in common interest developments seek to litigate ordinary maintenance decisions entrusted to the discretion of their associations&#39; boards of directors. Common sense suggests that judicial deference in such cases as this is appropriate, in view of the relative competence, over that of courts, possessed by owners and directors of common interest developments to make&nbsp;[21 Cal.4th 271]&nbsp;the detailed and peculiar economic decisions necessary in the maintenance of those developments. A deferential standard will, by minimizing the likelihood of unproductive litigation over their governing associations&#39; discretionary economic decisions, foster stability, certainty, and predictability in the governance and management of common interest developments. Beneficial corollaries include enhancement of the incentives for essential voluntary owner participation in common interest development governance and conservation of scarce judicial resources.&nbsp;( Lamden v. La Jolla Shores ) Membership Recourse . If the membership disagrees with the board&#39;s termite treatment method, it has recourse via the ballot box. Members can elect directors who reflect their preferences. This can be done by submitting a petition to recall the board &nbsp;or by running candidates at the next general election that believe a different form of termite treatment should be used. Vacating the Property Notice to Vacate . &nbsp;The association must give notice not less than 15 days nor more than 30 days prior to the date of the temporary relocation. The notice shall state the reason for the relocation, the date and time of the beginning of treatment, the anticipated date and time of termination of treatment, and that the occupants will be responsible for their own accommodations during the relocation. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4785(b)) &nbsp;If the board selects fumigation, occupants must sign an &quot;Occupants Fumigation Notice and Pesticide Disclosure&quot; form. (California Code of Regulations, Title 16, Section 1970.4.) See &quot; Right to Enter Units. &quot; Temporary Summary Removal . &nbsp;Associations may cause the temporary removal of occupants during the treatment of termites (or other wood-destroying pests or organisms). ( Civ. Code &sect; 4785(a)) &nbsp;If a resident refuses to vacate, the association can go to&nbsp;court for an order that the person vacate the property. Because the association will be seeking temporary, summary removal of occupants, pre-litigation ADR is not required. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5950(a)(3) )&nbsp;In an unpublished decision, an association decided to tent and fumigate their buildings for termites. A homeowner refused to cooperate because he claimed there were viable treatment methods that did not require tenting. The association filed an ex parte application for a summary removal order under Civil Code &sect;&nbsp;4785 &nbsp;to take immediate possession of the unit for the limited purpose of conducting the tent fumigation. The court granted the application and issued a removal order.&nbsp;(see&nbsp; Golden West Patio Homes v. Cortez ) Relocation Costs . The cost of alternate housing and temporary relocation during the repair and maintenance of the areas is borne by the owner of the separate interest affected. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4775 ) Attorney&#39;s Fees . In the Golden West case, the association was awarded its attorney fees and costs pursuant to Civil Code &sect; 5975 and the CC&amp;Rs.&nbsp;The Court of Appeal noted that the prevailing party in litigation is the one who prevailed on a practical level&nbsp;by achieving its main litigation objectives.&nbsp;Here, the Association&#39;s application for a temporary removal order was an action on a contract as it related to the association&#39;s duties under the CC&amp;Rs to maintain the common area of the development. The association was the prevailing party in the action as it achieved its litigation objective when the court granted the application for the removal order, enabling the association to proceed with the fumigation of the development&#39;s structures. Accordingly, the association was entitled to recover its attorney fees under the CC&amp;Rs. The court&nbsp;upheld the award of attorneys&#39; fees and costs.&nbsp;(see&nbsp; Golden West Patio Homes v. Cortez ) Inspection Reports California law does not require that homes be inspected for wood-destroying organisms before they are sold. Even so, most mortgage companies require it so as to protect the collateral for their loan. In addition, almost all purchase agreements include a termite contingency, which allows the buyer to withdraw from the transaction in the event of significant termite infestation and damage. Termite inspectors look for signs of wood-destroying pests such as termites, carpenter ants, rot fungus, and wood-infesting beetles. In addition, they look for evidence of pest activity, such as damaged wood, dead insects, and termite tubes. They then issue a written report describing every accessible part of the house they inspected and where they found signs of infestation or infections, if any. Lenders normally require certification from a pest control company that the structure is free of infestation or infection and all recommendations have been completed before the close of escrow. The costs of the inspection and repairs are generally paid by the seller, but are negotiable. To find out if a particular property has been inspected in the past two years, go to www.wdopestboard.ca.gov . Pest Control Associations are obligated to maintain the common areas. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4775 ) In condominium associations, this includes controlling the invasion of pests into common area structures, such as rodents and termites . Notice Required .&nbsp;&nbsp;An association or its authorized agent that applies any pesticide to a separate interest or to the common area without a licensed pest control operator shall provide the owner and, if applicable, the tenant of an affected separate interest and, if making broadcast applications, or using total release foggers or aerosol sprays, the owner and, if applicable, the tenant in an adjacent separate interest that could reasonably be impacted by the pesticide use with written notice&nbsp;as prescribed by&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 4777 . Separate Interest .&nbsp;At least 48 hours prior to application of the pesticide to a&nbsp; separate interest , the association or its authorized agent shall provide individual notice to the owner and, if applicable, the tenant of the separate interest and notice to an owner and, if applicable, the tenant occupying any adjacent separate interest that is required to be notified. Common Areas .&nbsp;At least 48 hours prior to application of the pesticide to a common area, the association or its authorized agent shall, if practicable, post the written notice described in paragraph (1) in a conspicuous place in or around the common area in which the pesticide is to be applied. Otherwise, if not practicable, the association or its authorized agent shall provide individual notice to the owner and, if applicable, the tenant of the separate interest that is adjacent to the common area. Resource:&nbsp; Pest Control Board . Pest Control Companies Below is a list of pest control companies that work with homeowner associations. ADAMS|STIRLING does not endorse&nbsp;any particular company. Boards of directors must do their due diligence when selecting a company.&nbsp; Accurate Termite &amp; Pest Control 17800 S. Main St. Suite # 203 Gardena, CA 90248 (310) 837-6483 [email&#160;protected] www.accuratetermitecontrol.com Angelo Termite &amp; Construction 16161 Scientific Irvine, CA. 92618 (949) 595-0111 [email&#160;protected] www.AngeloTermite.com Animal &amp; Insect Pest Management 2470 Stearns St., #116 imi Valley, CA 93063 (888) 344-6567 [email&#160;protected] www.myaipm.com Cragoe Pest Services, Inc. 885 Patriot Drive, Suite D Moorpark, CA 93021 (805) 446-7003 [email&#160;protected] www.cragoe.net Pacific Exterminator 1000 Business Center Circle, Ste 105 Newbury Park, CA 91320 [email&#160;protected] www.pacificexterminators.com &nbsp; Payne Pest Management 43460 Ridge Park Drive Temecula, CA 92590 [email&#160;protected] www.paynepestmgmt.com Pest Arrest Inc. 25612 Avenue Stanford Valencia, CA 91355 [email&#160;protected] www.pestarrest.com Ventura Pest Control, Inc. 2192 Anchor Court, Suite A Newbury Park, CA 91320 [email&#160;protected] www.venturapest.com ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login