URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/T/Terms-of-Use

Terms of Use You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME T Terms of Use Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings TERMS OF USE Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Not Governmental. Davis-Stirling.com (&quot;Website&quot;) is a product of Adams Stirling PLC (&quot;A|S&quot;) and is not related to, affiliated with or sponsored by any governmental agency or instrumentality or any public or nonprofit legal services organization. Informational and Advertising Only. The information on the Website is for informational and advertising purposes only and does not constitute legal advice. The information applies to California only. Because the law is constantly changing, the information on this site may not always be accurate, complete or current. You should not act or refrain from acting on the basis of anything contained on the Website without first seeking legal advice. No Representation by Visiting Website. A|S does not agree to represent you based upon your visit to the Website or its affiliated websites AdamsStirling.com, and CommercialCID.com, nor does sending an email to an A|S attorney establish an attorney-client relationship. For A|S to represent you, you must enter into a written fee agreement signed by both you and a partner from our firm. Do not send us information about your situation without first speaking with one of our lawyers and receiving authorization to do so. Representation of Associations. A|S serves as corporate counsel to community associations and to commercial and industrial common interest developments. So as to avoid potential conflicts, the firm does not represent individual owners. AGREEMENT Agreement Regarding Website. This Website and all of its elements are owned by A|S. The terms &quot;you&quot; and &quot;user&quot; refer to all individuals and entities accessing the Website for any reason. Users of the Website are governed by the terms of use found below which shall constitute an &quot;Agreement&quot; between A|S and users of the Website. Please read them carefully. If you do not accept the terms and conditions of this Agreement, DO NOT use this Website. By viewing or otherwise using the Website, you agree to the terms and conditions contained in this Agreement. Amendments . A|S reserves the right to change any content contained on the Website at any time without notice and also reserves the right to change the terms of use at his sole discretion at any time. The amended terms shall be effective immediately upon posting on the Website. You should visit this page periodically to review the terms of use because they are binding on you. No Legal Relationship . No joint venture, partnership, employment, or agency relationship exists between you and A|S as a result of this Agreement or your utilization of the Website. Email Caution . The use of internet email for conveying sensitive information is discouraged. Your communication with us through this Website may not be considered as privileged or confidential, and will not create or constitute an attorney-client relationship between the firm and any party. TRADEMARKS &amp; COPYRIGHTS Trademarks . Davis-Stirling.com and CommercialCID.com and all related products and service names, design marks and slogans are the trademarks or service marks of A|S. The &quot;look&quot; and &quot;feel&quot; of the Website (including color combinations, button shapes, layout, design and all other graphical elements) are also the trademarks or copyrights of A|S. Use of any of any editorial content and graphics for any purpose is strictly prohibited without prior written permission from A|S. You may not use, frame or utilize framing techniques to enclose any trademark, logo or other proprietary information on the Website, the content of any text or the layout/design of any page or form contained on a page without the express written consent of A|S. Copying of Content and Code Prohibited . Except as expressly authorized on the Website, the use of material from the Website on any other website is prohibited. You may not copy or adapt the HTML or other code that A|S creates to generate its pages. It is protected by copyright. Feedback. A|S welcomes your feedback and suggestions about how to improve the Website. Any ideas, suggestions, information or material received through the Website, however, will be deemed to include a royalty-free, perpetual, irrevocable, nonexclusive right and license for A|S to adopt, publish, reproduce, disseminate, transmit, distribute, copy, use, create derivative works, display, (in whole or part) worldwide, or act on such content without additional approval or consideration, in any form, media, or technology now known or later developed for the full term of any rights that may exist in such content. You hereby waive any claim to the contrary. AUTHORIZED USE Use of Material. A|S authorizes you to download material from the Website provided the use is solely for your personal, noncommercial purposes. Linking This Site to Others. You are granted a limited, nonexclusive right to create a hyperlink to the homepage of the Website, provided such link does not portray A|S, its websites or any of its employees, products or services in a false, misleading, derogatory or otherwise defamatory manner. This limited right may be revoked at any time. Job Market. The Job Market may be used only for lawful purposes by individuals seeking employment and employers seeking employees. You are only permitted to post ads for real jobs. All information contained in postings must be clear and accurate, not misleading in any way. Job postings which are deemed inappropriate may be removed without warning. Password Policy. For password protected portions of the Website, you agree to be solely responsible for the confidentiality and use of your password, as well as for any information posted on the Website using your password. You will also immediately notify us if you become aware of any unauthorized use of your password. PROHIBITED CONDUCT You agree NOT to use the Website to: 1. Post any information, image or material that is unlawful, harmful, threatening, abusive, harassing, invasive of another&#39;s privacy, defamatory, vulgar, obscene, or otherwise objectionable; 2. Post or transmit material in violation of any applicable local, state, national, or international law or regulation, or in a manner that will infringe the copyright, trademark, trade secret, patent or other intellectual property rights of others or violate the privacy, publicity or other personal rights of others; 3. Impersonate any person or entity, including an A|S employee or agent, an authorized user of A|S&#39;s services, a candidate, placement specialist or an employer, or otherwise misrepresent your affiliation with any person or entity; 4. Delete or modify any material posted by any other person or entity not related to you; 5. Communicate, send, or place unsolicited email (SPAM), telephone calls, mailings or other contacts to posting individuals and entities; 6. Upload, post, or otherwise make available any material that contains software viruses or any other computer code, files or programs designed to interrupt, destroy or limit the functionality of any computer software or hardware or telecommunications equipment; 7. &quot;Stalk&quot; or otherwise harass another, collect or store personal data about other users, or harm minors in any way; 8. Register an email address that you do not own or for which you do not have the express permission of the owner to register; or 9. Aggregate, copy or duplicate in any manner any of the materials or information available from the Website, without prior written consent. LIMITATION OF LIABILITY Disclaimer of Warranties . As a user of the Website, you expressly agree that: USE OF THE WEBSITE IS AT YOUR SOLE RISK. THE WEBSITE IS PROVIDED &quot;AS-IS&quot;. A|S MAKES NO WARRANTY THAT ANY INFORMATION OR SERVICE PROVIDED BY THE WEBSITE WILL MEET YOUR EXPECTATIONS, WILL BE UNINTERRUPTED, TIMELY, SECURE, OR ERROR-FREE. WE EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ALL WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, WHETHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NON-INFRINGEMENT. Downloaded Material. ANY MATERIAL DOWNLOADED OR OTHERWISE OBTAINED THROUGH THE USE OF THE WEBSITE IS DONE AT YOUR OWN DISCRETION AND RISK AND YOU WILL BE SOLELY RESPONSIBLE FOR ANY DAMAGE TO YOUR COMPUTER SYSTEM OR LOSS OF DATA THAT RESULTS FROM THE DOWNLOAD OF ANY SUCH MATERIAL. Passive Conduit. Davis-Stirling.com is a passive conduit for the online distribution and publication of user-submitted information. We do not screen communications or information. A|S takes no responsibility for the activities of job applicants or the companies posting job openings with respect to hiring, recruiting or other practices (or any of the information posted or downloaded by them on the Website). Waiver of Civil Code &sect;1542. In the event you have a dispute with one or more users of the Website, you release A|S, and their agents and employees from claims, demands and damages (actual and consequential, direct and indirect) of every kind and nature, known and unknown, suspected and unsuspected, disclosed and undisclosed, arising out of or in any way connected with such disputes. If you are a California resident, you hereby agree to waive California Civil Code &sect;1542, which says: &quot;A general release does not extend to claims which the creditor does not know or suspect to exist in his favor at the time of executing the release, which if known by him must have materially affected his settlement with the debtor.&quot; Links to Other Sites. The Website contains links to third party websites. A|S does not endorse the contents on other websites. If you decide to access linked third party sites, you do so at your own risk. Limitation of Liability . In no event shall A|S or its shareholders, employees, agents, affiliates, or attorneys be liable for any direct, special, indirect or consequential damages, or any other damages of any kind, including, but not limited to, loss of use, loss of profits, or loss of data, whether in an action in contract, tort (including, but not limited to, negligence), or otherwise, arising out of or in any way connected with the use of the Website or the materials contained on, or accessed through, the Website. Indemnity . You agree to defend, indemnify and hold harmless A|S and its shareholders, employees, agents, affiliates, and attorneys from any claim or demand, including reasonable attorneys&#39; fees, made by any third party due to or arising out of content you submit, post, transmit or make available through the Website, your violation of these terms and conditions of use or your violation of any rights of another, or relating to or arising from your use of the Website. Statute of Limitations. You agree that regardless of any statute or law to the contrary, any claim or cause of action arising out of or related to use of the Website or this Agreement must be filed within one (1) year after such claim or cause of action arose or be forever barred. MISCELLANEOUS Costs of Enforcement . The user of the Website agrees to be responsible for all costs incurred by A|S in enforcing these terms of use. Such costs include, but are not limited to, their reasonable attorneys&rsquo; fees and costs, including experts&#39; fees and any other costs incurred. Waiver. Failure by A|S to exercise or enforce any right or provision of this Agreement shall not constitute a waiver of any right or provision. Choice of Law and Forum. These terms and conditions shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of California. You agree to submit to the personal and exclusive jurisdiction of the courts located within the county of Los Angeles, California. Severability. If any provision of these terms and conditions shall be deemed unlawful, void, or for any reason unenforceable, then that provision shall be deemed severable from these terms and conditions and shall not affect the validity and enforceability of any remaining provisions. Entire Agreement. The terms and conditions in this Agreement constitute the entire agreement between you and A|S govern your use of the Website. This Agreement supersedes any prior communications or agreements between the parties. Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login