URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/T/Transfers-from-HOA-Reserves-Borrowing

Transfers from HOA Reserves & Borrowing You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME T Transfers from HOA Reserves & Borrowing Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings RESERVE TRANSFERS & BORROWING Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Annual Budgets Collections Audits &amp; Reviews Bank Accounts &amp; Loans Reserves Taxes Reserve Studies Duty to&nbsp; Fund Reserves Reserve Transfers &amp; Borrowing Investing Reserve Funds Capital&nbsp;Improvements Reserve&nbsp;Companies &nbsp;&nbsp; 2-Minute video Restrictions on Fund Transfers Reserve accounts are given significant protections by the Davis-Stirling Act. Associations must set up bank accounts that are separate and distinct from their&nbsp; managing agent&#39;s funds &nbsp;and separated into operating and reserve accounts.&nbsp;Boards may not spend reserve funds for any purpose other than the repair, restoration, replacement, or maintenance of, or litigation involving the repair, restoration, replacement, or maintenance of, major components the association is obligated to repair, restore, replace, or maintain. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5510(b) ) Two Signatures .&nbsp; Finally, the signatures of at least two board members, or one officer who is not a member of the board plus a board member, are required to withdraw money from the reserve account. ( Civ. Code &sect; 5510(a) ) Reallocate for Unexpected Expenses The reserve fund is a pool of money that can shift between line items in a reserve account to meet reserve funding needs. It is expected to adjust from year to year to reallocate funds to cover items that fail prematurely or cost less than anticipated.&nbsp;For example, if a boiler fails in year eight instead of year ten, as projected by the reserve study, funds can be shifted from other line items to cover the unexpected early expense. Or, if a pool heater replacement costs half the projected cost, the leftover funds can be assigned to other reserve line items. Such reallocations are not unusual. There are three primary reasons why an association may be in a situation to overspend from reserves: the repair/replacement expense is higher than expected, the expense is earlier than expected, or the expense was not anticipated, and no reserve funds were set aside. When that occurs, the reserve study is updated, and if necessary, allocations to reserves are increased to cover the shortfall. The board may need to impose emergency special assessments if the unexpected expense is significant. For example, The plumbing system is expected to last 50 years, and no funds are set aside because the development is only 15 years old. The system begins to fail in year fifteen due to latent construction defects and requires repairs that will cost $1 million--the entire amount currently in the reserve account. Borrowing From Reserves Without a membership vote, boards can borrow from reserves to meet short-term cash flow problems or other expenses. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 5515(a) ) (Some CPAs refer to reserve borrowing as designated investments, accrued obligations, internal asset designation, or asset allocation.) Examples of short-term cash flow problems include: Delinquencies . To cover shortfalls created by delinquencies. Insurance . To pay for unexpected increases in insurance premiums. Termites . To pay for unplanned termite treatment. Common Area Damage . To pay for unexpected damage to the common areas. Litigation . To pay litigation legal fees. Settlements . To settle claims. Amendments &amp; Restatements . To pay to amend or restate CC&amp;Rs and bylaws. Borrowing for Litigation .&nbsp;Associations can borrow from reserves to pay for litigation, including construction defect litigation .&nbsp;Using reserve funds for litigation is deemed a &quot;temporary transfer.&quot; ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 5520 .)&nbsp;When temporary transfers are made, boards must explain to the membership the reasons for the transfer and when and how the money will be repaid to the reserve fund. In addition, the funds must be restored within one year of the initial transfer date. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 5515 )&nbsp;Even though you anticipate litigation expenses next year, they do not qualify as a reserve item. Reserve accounts are for monies &quot;identified for use to defray the future repair or replacement of, or additions to, those major components the association is obligated to maintain.&quot; ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 5550 ) Legal expenses do not meet the definition of a &quot;component,&quot; nor do they meet National Reserve Study Standards .&nbsp;The appropriate place for anticipated legal expenses is the association&#39;s operating budget. This will likely increase your budget, which may require a dues increase or a special assessment for the next fiscal year. In addition, even though a temporary delay in restoring borrowed reserve funds is allowed, boards must exercise prudent fiscal management in maintaining the integrity of the reserve account &quot;and shall, if necessary, levy a special assessment &quot; to repay the funds within one year. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 5515 ) Other Expenses . The term &ldquo;other expenses&rdquo; referenced in section&nbsp;&sect; 5515(a) is sufficiently broad to permit a temporary transfer of reserve funds to the general operating account to fund expenses such as those related to a restatement of an association&#39;s governing documents. However, the statute contemplates temporary transfers intended to be repaid promptly. Although not expressly limited to emergency or extraordinary expenses, transfers from reserves should not be for routine and anticipated operating expenses since they are supposed to be funded by regular or special assessments sufficient to perform the association&rsquo;s obligation under the governing documents and the Davis-Stirling Act. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 5600(a) ) Suspending Reserve Deposits .&nbsp;Although no statute or case law exists on this&nbsp;issue, some believe suspending reserve deposits qualifies as borrowing from reserves. The argument is that monies allocated to the reserve account are pledged in the reserve funding plan &nbsp;and published annually to the membership, and the operating budget &nbsp;is mailed to all members before the start of the fiscal year. Those funds are then collected from the membership for that purpose. Intercepting reserve monies before they are deposited into the reserve account or waiting until after they are deposited produces the same result--reserve monies are used for non-reserve expenses. The counterargument that suspending reserve contributions does not qualify as borrowing is found in Civil Code&nbsp;&sect; 5515 . It states that the statute applies only to the &ldquo;temporary transfer of money from a reserve fund to the association&rsquo;s general operating fund,&rdquo; which does not occur. There is no transfer from the reserve fund. The fact that money is budgeted for a specific purpose is not binding and does not mean it cannot be redirected elsewhere if the need arises. Budgets are projections, and sometimes unexpected expenses that must be met, such as a sudden significant increase in insurance premiums or utility costs, occur. Reserve transfers can be temporarily reduced or suspended to meet those unexpected expenses. Notice of Intent to Borrow &amp; Repayment Board Meeting Agenda . Boards must take the follow steps when borrowing from the reserves: Give notice of their intent to borrow reserve funds by listing it as an agenda item in its notice of board meeting. The notice must include the reasons the reserve transfer is needed, some of the options for repayment, and whether a special assessment may be considered. If the board authorizes the transfer, it must issue a written finding, recorded in the minutes, explaining the reasons for the transfer and describing when and how the money will be repaid to the reserve fund. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 5515(c) ) Repay Reserves Within One Year .&nbsp;Moneys borrowed from the reserves must be repaid within one year of the date of the initial transfer, except that the board may, after giving the same notice required for considering a transfer and, upon making a finding supported by documentation that a temporary delay would be in the best interests of the association, temporarily delay the repayment. ( Civ. Code&nbsp;&sect; 5515(d) ) Associations are allowed to levy special assessments to replenish reserve funds. Transfers Between Reserve Line Items Sometimes associations need to repair/replace a reserve component that failed earlier than had been scheduled in the reserve study. A good example is the replacement of roofs. An early failure means insufficient funds are available for roof replacements. When that happens, the board can reallocate funds from other components into the roof line item to ensure sufficient funds are available to replace the roofs. This is not considered borrowing from the reserves.&nbsp;Borrowing is defined by&nbsp; Civil Code &sect; 5515(a) &nbsp;as the &quot;temporary transfer of money from a reserve fund to the association&rsquo;s general operating fund to meet short-term cash flow requirements or other expenses...&quot; Using available reserve funds to handle the early failure of a component does not meet the definition of borrowing.&nbsp; There is no requirement in the Davis-Stirling Act that associations lock in reserve funds on a component-by-component basis. In other words, the association is not required to have a &quot;roof fund&quot; or a &quot;street maintenance fund.&quot; The statute, instead, requires&nbsp; a &quot;reserve fund.&quot; Accordingly, the reserve fund is more accurately a pool of money available for significant repairs and/or replacement of the association&#39;s major common area components.&nbsp;Even with the component allocation method, the Davis-Stirling Act allows for the imprecise nature of reserve studies by authorizing adjustments to the study in annual updates in the years between visual inspections on the third year. Not only can components last longer or fail sooner than expected, but they can also cost less or more to repair than initially projected. As a result, adjustments to line items can be made without the need for constant &quot;borrowing&quot; resolutions in the minutes and notices to the membership. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login