URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/T/Tax-Filing-Deadlines

Tax Filing Deadlines You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME T Tax Filing Deadlines Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings TAX FILING DEADLINES Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Annual Budgets Collections Audits & Reviews Bank Accounts & Loans Reserves Taxes Filing Tax Returns Property Taxes Excess Income Resolution Tax Filing Deadlines Nonprofit vs Charitable Mobilehome Taxes 1. Employment Tax Returns . (Standard deadline: 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter.) For those associations that hire employees, Federal Form 941 and California Form DE-6 are due 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter. Tax payments are due semi-weekly, monthly, or at the filing date, depending upon the amount owed. Annual tax reports (Federal W-2, 940; California DE-7) are due January 31. 2. Federal Income Tax Returns . (Standard deadline: March 15.) All associations, no matter how small, must file a Federal income tax return two and a half months after the end of its fiscal year. For calendar year associations, the due date is March 15, although it can be extended for six months by filing an extension form (IRS Form 7004). HOAs may elect to file Form 1120H or the standard corporate Form 1120. 3. California Income Tax Returns . (Standard deadline: March 15.) California Form 100 is also due at the same time as the Federal returns. While most associations have “tax-exempt” status with the State of California, nonmembership income, such as interest, is taxable. A return is required if the association has more than $100 in nonmembership income. Failure to file Form 100 when needed can result in significant penalties and interest if tax is owed, and can also result in the suspension of the corporation by the state. 4. California Exempt Organization Return . (Standard deadline: 4.5 Months after year-end.) Form 199 is required of all tax-exempt associations that receive $50,000 or more in revenue from any source (assessments, etc.) It's due four and a half months after year-end, but can also be extended. A $10 filing fee is required annually. Failure to file this form when required can result in penalties plus interest. Corporate powers can also be suspended for failure to file this form. HOAs with less than $50,000 in revenue go online with the Franchise Tax Board and complete Form 199-N to satisfy their nonprofit filing requirement. 5. Estimated Tax Payments . (Standard deadline: quarterly.) If an association pays income taxes on its nonmember income, it may be required to pay estimated taxes quarterly to avoid an estimated tax penalty. For the federal government, estimates are needed if taxes are $500 or more. The state has no minimum. With increasing interest rates, many associations will pay more this year in income taxes than in the last 2 or 3 years. Federal tax deposits are made to your bank using a Federal Tax Deposit coupon, while state taxes are paid by check and mailed using Form 100-ES. Payments for calendar year associations are due April 15, June 15, September 15, and December 15. 6. 1099 Tax Forms . (Standard deadline: December 31.) Like all other businesses, associations are required to file 1099 Forms by January 31 for payments made during the previous calendar year. This is true even if the association has a fiscal year-end other than December 31. If you pay $600 or more during the calendar year to a "noncorporate service provider,” then you must issue a 1099-MISC to that service provider. Common HOA service providers include attorneys, managers, accountants, contractors, gardeners, pool service, and handymen. Corporate service providers are exempt from receiving 1099s. But how do you tell which providers are corporate? If the business has the words “inc.” or “corp.” in its name, it is a corporation. The word “co” (for company) does not specify a corporation. The 1099 form must show the service provider’s name, address, tax identification number (social security or employer ID number), and the amount paid during the calendar year. Copies should have been submitted to all service providers by January 31 and are due to the IRS by February 28 (the delay is to allow for corrections that may arise). 7. Independent Contractor Reporting . (Standard deadline: within 20 days of specified payments or execution of specified contracts.) California law requires businesses that use individual independent contractors to report “within 20 days of the earlier of first making payments that in the aggregate equal or exceed $600 in any year to a service provider, or entering into a contract or contracts with a service provider providing for payments that in the aggregate equal or exceed $600 in any year” to the California Employment Development Department (EDD). This law is intended to locate “deadbeat” parents who receive payments other than wages to be able to garnish them quickly to meet child support obligations. If you use many contractors continuously, January is a good time to report them to the EDD. Reporting is done on form DE-542 and can be mailed or faxed to the EDD. The most troublesome thing about this law (and yes, there are penalties for failure to file) is that reporting can be required anytime during the year, not just once a year or quarterly. For example, say you hire a painter on May 15 and sign a contract for a $5,000 job. Reporting would be required by June 4, even if no payments had yet been made. The reporting deadline is always 20 days after signing the contract. 8. Secretary of State Biennial Filings . (Standard deadline: every two years.) The Nonprofit Corporation Statement of Information (SI-100) and the Statement of Common Interest Development (SI-CID) must be filed with the Secretary of State every two years. These are not tax forms, but failure to file them with the Secretary of State can suspend corporate status . Filing fees are $20 for the SI-100 and $15 for the SI-CID. Since the forms are required only every two years, the due date is tied to the association’s incorporation month, not its fiscal year. Since they are not tax forms, it is common for this filing to be overlooked if the association’s mailing address has changed. Although it is seldom done, the state allows updated forms to be filed without paying an additional fee. Fill-in forms are available online at www.ss.ca.gov. Thank you to Michael J. Gartzke, CPA of Goleta, California, for this article. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login