URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/V/Virtual-Zoom-Meetings

Virtual (Zoom) Meetings You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME V Virtual (Zoom) Meetings Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings VIRTUAL (ZOOM) VIDEOCONFERENCE MEETINGS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Boards of Directors Board Meetings Committees Management Open&nbsp;Meetings Executive&nbsp;Sessions Emergency Meetings Zoom&nbsp;Meetings Emails Quorum Minutes Motions and&nbsp;Votes Meeting Notice &amp; Agenda Who Can Attend? Open Forum Recording&nbsp;Meetings &nbsp; Virtual Board Meetings Virtual Meeting Attendance A &quot;virtual meeting&quot; is one conducted via teleconference or video conference in which directors and members can participate in real time. Director Attendance . Board members who cannot physically appear in person at a board meeting (whether regular, special, emergency, or executive session) can attend electronically by telephone or video. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4090 ) They can attend if the absent director can hear all other board members, and all other board members can hear the absent director. Attendance in this manner counts as if the director were physically present in the meeting. ( Civ. Code &sect; 4090 , Corp. Code &sect; 7211(a)(6) ) If the meeting is in executive session , directors can all attend virtually by conference call or video conference. Member Attendance . Beginning January 1, 2024, board and membership meetings can be held virtually without designating a physical location for members to attend. To hold virtual meetings where members are allowed to attend, the following conditions must be satisfied ( Civ. Code &sect; 4926(a) ): Technical Instructions . The&nbsp;meeting notice must contain clear technical instructions on how to participate. Contact Information . The notice must contain the telephone number and email address of someone who can provide technical assistance before and during the meeting.&nbsp; Individual Delivery . A reminder that members may request individual delivery of meeting notices, with instructions on how to do so. Ability to Participate . Every director and member has the same ability to participate in the meeting as if it were held in person. Roll Call Vote . Any vote of the directors shall be conducted by a roll call vote.&nbsp;&nbsp;(Directors continue to make motions and hold discussions as they would at an in-person meeting. However, voting by directors must be conducted by a roll call vote (each director is called by name, and his/her vote is recorded individually). Telephone Option . Any person entitled to participate in the meeting shall be allowed to participate by telephone.&nbsp;(Some members might not have access to the internet for videoconferencing but could call into the meeting.) Exception to Virtual Meetings A meeting where ballots are counted and tabulated pursuant to Section 5120 cannot be entirely virtual. It must conducted (i) entirely at a physical location or (ii) a hybrid meeting with virtual elements plus a physical location.&nbsp;( Civ. Code &sect; 4926(b) ) What remains unclear is the location of the ballot tabulation. There is a split of opinion in the legal community. Following are the two interpretations: Onsite Tabulation . Those who argue for the Inspector of Elections to physically attend the meeting and count ballots cite Civil Code 5120(a) , which states: &quot;All votes shall be counted and tabulated by the inspector or inspectors of elections, or the designee of the inspector of elections, in public at a properly noticed open meeting of the board or members. Any candidate or other member of the association may witness the counting and tabulation of the votes . . .&quot; Offsite Tabulation . Because of the high cost associated with an inspector appearing in person, others favor an interpretation that allows the inspector to appear virtually as long as the camera clearly shows the inspector counting and tabulating votes. They point out that &quot;in public&quot; means being viewed or witnessed, i.e., not hidden, which is satisfied with a wide-angle camera showing the counting.&nbsp; Hybrid Meetings Boards can also hold hybrid meetings where directors meet in person with some or all members observing the meeting via Zoom. Hybrid meetings can be especially important for associations with seasonal residents, i.e., &quot;snowbirds&quot; who fly in for the winter and leave during the summer. It allows them to attend meetings. Hybrid meetings are also useful for presentations by vendors and consultants who might otherwise be unavailable to attend in person. They can also be used to reduce legal fees. Having counsel attend an executive session meeting by video conference eliminates drive-time charges.&nbsp; Technology Setup . The technology for hybrid meetings is relatively inexpensive and easy to set up.&nbsp;You only need a laptop, a medium or large-screen TV on a wall, a wide-angle webcam, and a conference speaker. I recommend a Bluetooth speaker with extension microphones to make it easy for everyone to hear and be heard.&nbsp;There is a large selection of affordable equipment to choose from. A techie can help boards decide what is best for their meeting room, purchase the equipment, and set up everything. It pays to invest in good equipment. Doing so will give boards the flexibility and convenience to hold meaningful hybrid meetings.&nbsp; Meeting Owl . For those willing to spend extra money, the &quot; Meeting Owl &quot; is the way to go. It captures a 360&deg; view of the room in high definition and 360&deg; audio up to 18 feet. The camera automatically focuses on whoever is speaking,&nbsp;while showing a 360&deg; view of the room.&nbsp;&nbsp; Notice of Hybrid Meeting .&nbsp;The meeting notice should include a statement that, as a courtesy only, the board is making the meeting available by Zoom and teleconference for those who cannot attend in person.&nbsp;The unexpected loss of internet service should not derail a hybrid meeting since Zoom provides a teleconference dial-in phone number for every videoconference meeting for those who want to participate by telephone only.&nbsp;If the internet goes down, remote attendees can switch over to the teleconference line for the meeting.&nbsp;The meeting notice should also state that if an attendee has technical issues, the meeting will continue with those present in person. Secretary Recordings With the board&#39;s permission, the secretary may record open board meetings to assist in the preparation of minutes. Once minutes have been approved, boards have the option of erasing the recording or posting it in a password protected portion of the association&#39;s website for members to review.&nbsp; Homeowner Recordings Boards can prohibit recordings by attendees, whether it be members or other directors.&nbsp;All meetings should begin with a warning that recordings are prohibited. ASSISTANCE : If your association needs assistance with this issue, contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login