URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/W/Workers-Compensation-Insurance

Workers Compensation Insurance You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME W Workers Compensation Insurance Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings WORKERS' COMPENSATION INSURANCE Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links HOA Insurance Contractors, Owners &amp; Renters Fire Safety Board&#39;s&nbsp;Duties HOA&nbsp;Insurance Fidelity Bonds &amp; Employee Dishonesty Cyber Crime Insurance Workers&#39; Compensation Earthquake&nbsp; Insurance Tendering&nbsp;Claims Insurance Deductibles Workers&#39; Compensation Insurance By law, all employers are required to carry workers&#39; compensation insurance. Workers&#39; compensation is a &quot;no fault&quot; system in which injured workers receive medical benefits no matter who causes the job-related accident. If an illness or injury is job-related, the injured worker is guaranteed medical care and may receive monetary awards for disability and job retraining. In exchange for these guarantees, injured employees are barred from suing their employers and co-workers. Boards are exposed to&nbsp;potential liability&nbsp;if they fail to carry workers&#39; compensation insurance. Purpose of Workers&#39; Compensation Insurance Workers&#39; compensation insurance provides lost wages, medical benefits, and rehabilitation costs to employees injured &quot;in the course and scope&quot; of their jobs. By carrying the insurance, general pain and suffering damages, as well as&nbsp;punitive damages, are not available to employees. With the insurance in place, employees do not have to sue to receive medical benefits.&nbsp;California mandates insurance for all employers, even if the company only has one employee. Sole proprietors are generally exempt unless they are roofers.&nbsp;If an employer provides a safe work environment for employees so that employees do not suffer injuries, &ldquo;experience rating&rdquo; allows for lower insurance premiums. Those employers with high injury rates pay higher premiums. It&nbsp;provides an incentive for employers to provide safe working conditions. Vendors Without Employees .&nbsp;The State Compensation Insurance Fund (State Fund) will write coverage for a sole proprietor (with no employees). It&#39;s called a zero-payroll workers&#39; compensation policy. We recommend that boards require sole proprietors to obtain coverage. Failure to Carry WC Insurance .&nbsp;If an association has employees and is sued for failing to purchase workers&#39; compensation insurance, many&nbsp; D&amp;O policies &nbsp;exclude claims for being under-insured. They use a &quot;failure to maintain insurance&quot; provision within their D&amp;O policy--but consistent in every Directors &amp; Officers Liability policy is a specific exclusion for any claim &quot;arising out of, directly or indirectly resulting from or in consequence of, or in any way involving&quot;&nbsp;. . .&nbsp;bodily injury or sickness.&nbsp;This would include bodily injury or sickness, whether workplace-related or not. That is because the pricing of the D&amp;O coverage does not contemplate being the ultimate catch-all policy (&quot;safety net&quot;) for every instance where the board failed to purchase coverage.&nbsp;If the D&amp;O were to provide such coverage, there would be no way for the actuaries to price the coverage.&nbsp;Moreover, the board would have no reason to purchase insurance--they could just maintain the best D&amp;O policy possible (with the highest limits) and hope for the best. As a result, the carrier would probably not provide the board with a defense because the underlying matter was specifically excluded.&nbsp;However, there might be exceptions, and the carrier might provide defense costs. Board and Committee Member Coverage Although most Directors and Officers ( D&amp;O Insurance ) policies protect committee members who might be sued for negligence, they do not cover injuries sustained by committee members. D&amp;O policies typically contain an exclusion for bodily injury so they do not duplicate the bodily injury coverage in the association&#39;s underlying general liability policy.&nbsp;There are at least three other avenues where the committee member&#39;s injury could be covered under the association&#39;s insurance: (i) guest medical, (ii) commercial general liability, and (iii) workers&#39; compensation. Guest Medical Payments . &nbsp;If the association has &quot;Guest Medical Payments&quot; coverage, it covers injuries in the common areas &ldquo;regardless of fault.&rdquo; The committee member would not have to prove the association was negligent in order to have his medical expenses considered. However, coverage is typically low ($5,000 per person), and the policy does not cover injuries that occur on the premises the &ldquo;person normally occupies.&rdquo; If the slip and fall happened on the walkway leading to his unit or a portion of the Common Area the owner frequently used (parking garage, swimming pool, tennis court, etc.), the carrier might deny coverage.&nbsp; Commercial General Liability . If the association does not have &quot;guest medical&quot; or the injuries exceed limits, the claim could be covered under the CGL policy. If the association&#39;s negligent maintenance of the premises caused the injury, the medical expenses should be covered. Specially Endorsed Workers&rsquo; Compensation . &nbsp;If a board member or committee member is injured while carrying out his/her duties, most insurance carriers will not cover the injuries because volunteers are not considered employees under&nbsp; Labor Code &sect; 3352(i) . Any person performing voluntary service for a public agency or a private, nonprofit organization who receives no remuneration for the services other than meals, transportation, lodging, or reimbursement for incidental expenses&quot; is excluded from the definition of &quot;employee.&quot; A small number of&nbsp;workers&rsquo; compensation insurance&nbsp;carriers have begun issuing policies with an endorsement that broadens the definition of &ldquo;employee&rdquo; to include the board of directors, officers and &ldquo;appointed committee members.&rdquo; If an association has this coverage, the committee member is covered if he was acting on behalf of the association in his &quot;official capacity&quot; at the time of injury. As a prerequisite to coverage, the board&#39;s minutes must clearly reflect the appointment of the person to a committee. Boards should check with their insurance broker and, if available, extend coverage to volunteers. Other Ways to Reduce Risk . Hold Harmless Agreement . Boards can require volunteers to sign a hold harmless agreement releasing the association from liability if the volunteer is injured. However, this may discourage volunteers if they have no protection in the event of an injury. Safety . Another way to reduce risk is to ensure volunteers have safe working conditions. This means no faulty ladders or damaged tools. Another is to only allow low-risk tasks (clerical work, picking up trash, sweeping sidewalks, planting flowers, etc.). Boards should avoid high-risk tasks&mdash;anything involving heights (cleaning gutters, replacing roof tiles) or power tools (chainsaws, lawnmowers, and so on). Self-Insurance Workers&#39; compensation insurance can be costly, and some associations wonder about self-insurance as a way to save money. Self-insurance is permissible under Labor Code &sect; 3700 if an association obtains a certificate of consent from the Director of Industrial Relations.&nbsp;The certificate will only be awarded upon proof of ability to pay any compensation that may become due to the association&#39;s employees. If approved, the association must file a self-insured employer&#39;s annual report and make a security deposit of the greater of $220,000 or 125% of the estimated future liability for compensation plus 10% of future liability for administrative and legal costs. ( Labor Code &sect; 3701 ) The security must be in the form of cash, securities, surety bonds, or irrevocable letters of credit.&nbsp;Because of these requirements, only a small percentage of corporations statewide self-insure. Recommendation : Boards should have their association&#39;s insurance reviewed by an agent specializing in homeowner associations. Insurance coverage is too important to leave to inexperienced agents. ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login