URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/HOME/W/Wild-Animal-Attacks

Wild Animal Attacks You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History HOME W Wild Animal Attacks Index Statutes Case Law New Laws A-Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z Abbreviations & acronyms Accessory dwelling units Acclamation Accounting Acoustics ADA ADR ADUs Adverse possession AEDs Agenda Airbnb rentals Alcohol Alternative dispute resolution Aluminum wiring Amendments Amenities American flag Animals Annexation Annual disclosures Annual meeting Antennas Appointing directors Arbitration Architectural Articles of Inc. Artificial grass Asbestos Asphalt Assessment collection Assessments Assistance animals Associations Attorneys Audits Automobiles Balcony inspections Balcony maintenance Bank accounts Bankruptcy Bees Bible studies Bicycles Bidding Board duties Board meetings Board of directors Board recall Borrowing from banks Borrowing from reserves Budgets Business Judgment Rule Buying a condo Bylaws CACM CAI Candidate qualifications cannabis Capital improvements Carbon monoxide Cars CC&Rs Censure Census takers Certificates of deposit Charging stations Children Christmas lights CID-Menu CIDs Cigars - cigarettes Clothes washer Clotheslines Clubhouse Collections Committees Common area Common interest development Community apartment projects Community service org. Condo conversions Condo plans Condominium Conflicts of interest Construction bonds Construction defects Contractors Contracts Co-ops Corporate Transparency Act Corporations Coyotes Criminal activity Cumulative voting - elections Cumulative voting - recalls Cyber crime D&O insurance Day care homes Debt collection Declarant Declaration Defamation Defibrillators Delegate voting Delinquent assessments Developer Director qualifications Directors & officers Disabled Disciplinary hearings Disclosure checklist Discrimination Dispute resolution Disruptive directors Dissolving associations Dogs Drain lines Drug rehab homes Dues Duties of directors Earthquakes Easements E-Bikes Elections Electric vehicles Email Embezzlement Emergency assessment Emergency meetings Emotional support animal Employee salaries Enforce rules Equestrian trails Escrow documents Ethics EV charging stations Exclusive use common area Executive committee Executive session Facebook Family Trust Fannie Mae Fees Felons FHA certification Fidelity bonds Fiduciary duties Financial records Fines Fire safety Firearms Fireplaces Flags Flyers Foreclosure Free speech Gardens Governing documents Group care homes Guide dogs Guns Gyms Handicapped Harassment Hardwood floors Hearings History of DS Act HOA Hoarders Hold harmless & indemnities Holiday decorations Homeowner rights IDR Inspect records Inspector of elections Insurance Joint neighborhood meetings Judicial deference doctrine Judicial foreclosure Landscaping Larry Stirling Late fees Lawyers Lead Paint Legal Fees Liability of directors Libel Liens Litigation & ADR Litigation Menu Loans Lot splits - SB 9 Maint assessment district Maintenance Maintenance-Menu Managers Manufactured homes Marijuana Master association Mechanics lien Mediation Meetings - board Meetings - membership Megan's Law Members' rights Membership list Mental illness Minutes Mobilehomes Motions Movies & music Negligence Newsletters Noise Nominations Nuisance Occupancy restrictions Officers Open Forum Open Meeting Act Operating account Own your owns Painting Parking Parliamentary procedures Partition common areas Party walls Penalties Permits Pest control Petitions Pets Planned developments Playgrounds Pledge of allegiance Plumbing Political signs Pot Power of attorney President Privileged information Project managers Proxy Psychiatric hold Quorum of directors Quorum of members Real estate issues Reasonable accommodation Recall directors Receiver Reciprocal easements Records Recuse Rent restrictions Renters Reserves Resignations Resolutions Restraining order Right of entry Rights of members Ring doorbell cameras Roofs Rules Rules Menu RVs Safety Salaries Satellite dishes SB 9 (lot splits} Secretary Secretary of State filings Security issues & cameras Senior communities Service animals Sewer line Sex offenders Sexual harassment Sidewalks Sign language Signature card Signs Skateboards Slander SLAPP motion Small claims court Smoking Snakes Sober living facility Social media Solar panels Special assessment Statement of Information Stock cooperative Subrogation Sukkahs Surveys Suspended corporation Swimming pools Taxes Temporary restraining order Tenancies in common Term limits Terminology Termites Timeshares Towing Town hall meeting Townhouse Traffic Violations Trails Transfer fees Treasurer Trees Trucks U.S. flag Ultra vires act Unanimous written consent Uncontested election Unincorporated ass'ns Unruh Act VA certification Vacancies on the board Vacation rentals Vehicles Vexatious litigants View rights Violations Virtual meetings Volunteer protections Voting - board Voting - membership Waiver of Liability Warranties Washer/Dryer Wasps Water conservation Water damage Websites Wheelchair access Wi-Fi Wild animals Workers compensation Yard sale Zero-base budgeting Zinsco panels Zoning Zoom meetings LIABILITY FOR WILD ANIMAL ATTACKS Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links Maintenance Pest Control Plumbing Balcony Inspections Asbestos &amp; Mold Reserves Termites &amp; Pest Control Bees &amp;&nbsp;Wasps Wild&nbsp;Animals QUESTION : Our association has frequent encounters with packs of coyotes , roaming black bears and occasional mountain lions sleeping on decks. Most owners get a thrill out of seeing the bears or mountain lions, but an occasional owner wants the wild animals removed and I don&rsquo;t mean just relocated. Does an association have any liability because of the wild animals? ANSWER : Most wild animals naturally fear humans and keep their distance. Problems arise when animals have access to food and garbage left out by homeowners. They develop an appetite for easy pickings and keep coming back for more. When that happens, they lose their natural fear of humans and become aggressive. This is especially true with bears, which is why feeding them is illegal with fines and jail time. Relocate the Animals? According to California&#39;s Department of Fish and Game, moving a mountain lion is not an option because it causes deadly conflicts with other mountain lions in the relocation area. When it comes to bears, you can find the State&#39;s official policy on their website. They may refuse to relocate bears as well. Coyotes play an important role in keeping rodent populations under control. Unfortunately, they love to supplement their diet with pets. According to Fish &amp; Game, &quot;Relocating a problem coyote is not an option because it only moves the problem to someone else&rsquo;s neighborhood.&quot; Kill the Animals? California will allow the killing of wild animals that threaten people. Also, &quot;Those that prey on pets or livestock can be killed by a property owner after the required depredation permit is secured.&quot; However, it is unlikely the state would approve the killing of endangered animals that eat pets when the problem is easily resolved by keeping pets indoors at night. Stop the Animals? If an association takes steps to protect the membership by installing fences or some other barriers to keep wild animals away from owners, the association may be assuming a duty it does not have. With that comes potential liability. It&#39;s like a person driving by an accident. If he keeps on driving, he has no liability. If he stops and helps the injured victim, he could be sued if he does not exercise a certain level of care. As a result, associations may be better off limiting their actions to warning residents to protect themselves. There are a number of resources on the internet about dangerous wildlife. Rules &amp; Regulations . Associations can adopt rules and regulations regarding garbage bins and feeding animals. Unfortunately, that may also create potential liability. If a board adopts rules, it has a duty to enforce them. Plaintiff&#39;s attorney will argue to the jury that &quot;Because the board failed to enforce its rule against feeding wild animals, a mountain lion became aggressive and attacked my client, thereby making the association liable for the damage suffered by my client.&quot; Litigation . Even if the board did everything right and a bear mauls a birthday party of toddlers, the association will get sued anyway. That&#39;s because plaintiffs sue everyone in sight and let the courts sort out the responsible parties. In that case, the association wants to establish no discernible liability so it can get out of the action as quickly as possible. Recommendation : Plaintiffs&#39; lawyers will look for every way possible to read into the CC&amp;Rs some sort of duty by the association to protect the health, safety and welfare of its members. To minimize potential liability, associations with wild animal problems should amend their CC&amp;Rs to specifically eliminate any duty or liability related to wild animals. In addition, they should obligate owners to take affirmative steps to protect themselves from wild animals.&nbsp;Finally, boards should regularly warn residents in newsletters to avoid contact with wild animals, not to feed wild animals, to use tamper-proof trash bins, etc. The reminder should make it clear that the association is NOT responsible for keeping residents safe. The Supreme Court in Georgia made similar observations about HOA warnings when an alligator killed a guest. (See The Landings HOA v. Williams ) Further Reading . An excellent article on the issue is titled:&nbsp; Lions, Tigers and Bears, Oh My! ASSISTANCE : Associations needing legal assistance can contact us . To stay current with community association issues, subscribe to the Davis-Stirling Newsletter . Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login