URL: https://www.davis-stirling.com/About-Us/Attorneys/Larry-Stirling

Larry Stirling You are using an outdated browser. Please upgrade your browser to improve your experience. Menu HOME Legal Services Commercial CIDs Newsletters Resources Videos Join Us Contact Us --> Browsing History About Us Attorneys Larry Stirling Print &nbsp; Share &nbsp; Report Broken Links HON. LAWRENCE W. STIRLING (Ret.) Public Service. Mr. Stirling has a history of distinguished service in the public sector. After serving as an administrative analyst for San Diego&#39;s City Manager, he was elected to the San Diego City Council. Assembly &amp; Senate . Subsequently, he served four terms as Assemblyman for the 77th District. His record of achievement led to his election to the State Senate. While in elected office, Mr. Stirling brought about dramatic change in law enforcement, courts organization, maritime hatchery technology, application of computers to local governments, national environmental assessments under NEPA, retirement investment policy in California resulting in billions of additional state and local earnings extending from the past and into the future, pioneered unified auditing nationwide, instituted public transit performance auditing, reconfigured the highway system in San Diego County, established one of the largest city parks in the nation, shepherded the adoption of the successful adopt-a-highway program, mid-wifed the 911 system into existence, designed the first police computerized dispatch system in the nation, first to automate a public library system, developed highway traffic command centers, the first one operating on Kearney Mesa, co-authored water marketing legislation, converted traffic fines from arrest warrants to civil collections, and dozens of other programs. Author of Davis-Stirling Act. While serving in the California Legislature, then Assembly Member Larry Stirling authored the Davis-Stirling Common Interest Development Act, a bill sponsored by Professor Katharine Rosenberry. The Act created the body of law that now governs all community associations in California. Author of Adopt-A-Highway . Senator Stirling is also the father of the highly successful Adopt-a-Highway program. He authored and then championed a bill to address the problem of highway litter. His concept was simple--authorize a public/private partnership to allow individuals, organizations, and businesses to help maintain sections of California&#39;s highways. To date, more than 120,000 Californians have cleaned and enhanced over 15,000 miles of roadside by removing litter, planting trees and wildflowers, removing graffiti, and controlling vegetation. Judge Stirling . While in the Senate, Mr. Stirling was appointed by Governor Deukmejian to the bench as a judge. Judge Stirling presided over thousands of cases, both civil and criminal. As a result of his efforts on behalf of Court unification, he was commended by various state/local bar associations and, upon his retirement from the bench, by the California Judges Association. Author of Three Books . In addition to authoring the Davis-Stirling Act that bears his name, Mr. Stirling authored over 200 pieces of legislation and two state constitutional amendments. He also authored three books: Leading at a Higher Level , a book on public administration reform, and Asked and Answered , a book on practical courtroom evidence. His latest work is &quot;The Noblest Motive,&quot; a textbook on public administration based on his experiences of having served in all three branches if the government, executive, legislative, and judicial, and at every level, local, regional, state, and Federal. Copies can be obtained via Amazon. Military Service. Mr. Stirling also served in the military. While in the Service, he commanded a 550-man unit in Korea and was awarded the Combat Badge for infantry operations along the DMZ. He was then assigned to the 12th Special Forces (Green Berets), went to airborne school, and became an A Team commander. From there, Mr. Stirling was assigned to the Pentagon before retiring from the Army. PROFESSIONAL Elected to four terms as Assemblyman for the 77th District Elected to State Senate Superior Court Judge Author and Speaker EDUCATION Juris Doctor . Western State University, San Diego, CA Bachelor of Arts . Major in Political Science, San Diego State University, San Diego, CA MILITARY A Major in the U.S. Army Commanded troops in Korea Served with Special Forces (Green Berets) Served in the Pentagon Main Index Main Index Statutes Case Law Awards Legal Terms Of Use Privacy Statement Disclaimer Contact Us (800) 464-2817 &nbsp; Connect Free Newsletter Linkedin Share Email Google Favorites More Copyright 2004-2025. Davis-Stirling.com is a product of Adams Stirling PLC . Office &nbsp; | &nbsp; Login